The Project Gutenberg eBook of The works of the Reverend George
Whitefield, M.A, Vol. 1 (of 6), by George Whitefield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The works of the Reverend George Whitefield, M.A, Vol. 1 (of 6)

Author: George Whitefield

Release Date: September 12, 2022 [eBook #68976]

Language: English

Produced by: Brian Wilson, Heather Clark and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND
GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M.A, VOL. 1 (OF 6) ***





          The Works of the Reverend George Whitefield, M.A.




  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                                                                │
  │                      Transcriber’s Notes                       │
  │                                                                │
  │                                                                │
  │  Punctuation has been standardized.                            │
  │                                                                │
  │  The original text may show quotations within quotations, set  │
  │  off by similar quote marks. The inner quotations have been    │
  │  changed to alternate quote marks for improved readability.    │
  │                                                                │
  │  Characters in small caps have been replaced by all caps.      │
  │                                                                │
  │  Non-printable characteristics have been given the following   │
  │      Italic text:             --> _text_                       │
  │                                                                │
  │  This book was written in a period when many words had         │
  │  not become standardized in their spelling. Words may have     │
  │  multiple spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in   │
  │  the text. These have been left unchanged unless indicated     │
  │  with a Transcriber’s Note.                                    │
  │                                                                │
  │  Footnotes are identified in the text with a superscript       │
  │  number and are shown immediately below the paragraph in which │
  │  they appear.                                                  │
  │                                                                │
  │  Transcriber’s Notes are used when making corrections to the   │
  │  text or to provide additional information for the modern      │
  │  reader. These notes are identified by ♦♠♥♣ symbols in the     │
  │  text and are shown immediately below the paragraph in which   │
  │  they appear.                                                  │
  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘




  Illustration:    The Rev. George Whitefield A.M.
                 late Chaplain to the Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ, The
                       Countess of Huntingdon.
            Born Dec. 16. 1714 O. S.  Died Sep. 30. 1770.
               N. Hone pinxᵗ.         I. Taylor Sculpᵗ.


                                 THE
                                WORKS
                           OF THE REVEREND
                       GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M.A.

                  Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD,
       And Chaplain to the Rt. Hon. the Countess of HUNTINGDON.

                              CONTAINING

                      All his SERMONS and TRACTS
                  Which have been already published:

                                 WITH

                   A SELECT COLLECTION of LETTERS,
  Written to his most intimate Friends, and Persons of Distinction,
  in _England_, _Scotland_, _Ireland_, and _America_, from the Year
      1734, to 1770, including the whole Period of his Ministry.

                                 ALSO

               Some other PIECES on IMPORTANT SUBJECTS,
       never before printed; prepared by Himself for the Press.

                        To which is prefixed,

                       An ACCOUNT of his LIFE,
            Compiled from his Original PAPERS and LETTERS.


                               VOL. I.


                               LONDON:

        Printed for EDWARD and CHARLES DILLY, in the Poultry;
             and Messrs. KINCAID and BELL, at Edinburgh.

                              MDCCLXXI.


                     Entered at STATIONERS-HALL,
                   agreeable to Act of Parliament.




                            ADVERTISEMENT.


THIS complete Edition of the late Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD’s Works (printed
under the Direction of his Executors) it is presumed, will be highly
acceptable to all his Friends, as the just and proper Monument of
his Memory and Merit; and both pleasing and useful to the Public in
general, but especially to those who desire to cherish and promote the
Spirit of primitive Christianity.

To the Sermons and Tracts formerly published, and which are now
ranged in their proper Order, are also added other Pieces, on the
most Important Subjects: together with a valuable Collection of
Letters, selected and prepared by himself for Publication; in which is
displayed, that native Spirit and Simplicity, so eminently conspicuous
in his Life and Conversation. His Friends, and even his Enemies
(should there be any Such) will here openly behold his unwearied
Diligence, undaunted Firmness, noble Disinterestedness, and exceeding
Usefulness in the Work of the Ministry; also, his remarkable Fidelity
in Friendship, exemplary Piety, and fervent Zeal for the Prosperity of
pure and undefiled Religion.

The Letters and Works can stand in no need of any Recommendation:
Connected with the account of his Life, (now drawn from original
Papers) they exhibit a plain and undisguised View of the worthy
Author, in all Parts of his public Service, as well as in his private
Retirements, and inward Trials; faithfully shewing the Whole of that
_living Temple_, which was sacred to GOD, and happily instructing
Mankind in the Ways of Godliness and eternal Life.




                               LETTERS.


                              LETTER I.

                            _To Mr. G. H._

                                              _Oxon, July 18, 1734._
  _Dear Sir_,

HAVING heard the melancholy news of your brother’s death, I could
not help sending you a line, to let you know how much I am concerned.
Indeed, I cannot say, I am so much grieved on his account, as for
that sorrow, which the loss of so valuable a youth must necessarily
occasion to all his relations. No! I rather envy him his blessed
condition. He, unquestionably is divinely blessed, whilst we are
still left behind to wrestle with unruly passions, and by a continued
looking unto JESUS and running in our christian race, to press forward
to that high prize, of which he, _dear Youth_, is now in full fruition.
These are my true sentiments about his death; I leave you to judge
then, whether I had need be concerned on his account; and surely was
it to be put to your choice, whether so religious a young man should
live or die, no one could be so cruel, as to wish to detain him from
his wished-for glory. Be not then too much concerned at his death, but
let us rather learn that important lesson, which his whole life taught
us: “That there is nothing comparable to an early piety.” I thought
to have spent many agreeable hours with him in christian and edifying
conversation, when I came to _Gloucester_; but he is gone to more
agreeable company, and long before now has joined the heavenly choir.

I shall only add, that as your brother imitated our blessed SAVIOUR
in his life, so I pray GOD, he may resemble him in his death, and
be a means, like his beloved Redeemer, of reconciling all former
animosities, which is the hearty wish of, dear Sir,

               Your sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                            _G. W._


                              LETTER II.

                            _To Mr. G. H._

                                          _Bristol, Sept. 10, 1734._
  _Dear Sir_,

THIS morning I wrote to you in haste, expecting Mr. _I._ would soon
be going; but to my great satisfaction, he came hither this night,
and soon afterwards, your very much wished-for letter was brought to
hand; which (after ten thousand thanks for so many repeated favours)
I shall now beg leave to answer. You tell me “Mr. _P._ likes _N._”
GOD be praised! That he hath recommended something to my perusal. I’ll
read it, GOD willing, with care, at my return. “That he wants to know
my quality, state, condition, circumstances, &c.” Alas! that anyone
should enquire after such a wretch as I am. However, since he hath
been so kind, pray tell him, that as for my quality, I was a poor,
mean drawer; but by the distinguishing grace of GOD, am now intended
for the ministry. As for my estate, that I am a servitor; and as to
my condition and circumstances, I have not of my own any where to
lay my head. But my friends, by GOD’s providence, minister daily to
me, and in return for such unmerited, unspeakable blessings, I trust
the same good Being will give me grace to dedicate myself without
reserve to his service. To “spend and be spent” for the welfare of
my fellow-creatures, endeavouring to promote the gospel of his Son
as much as lies in my poor power. But “observe his humility,” says
Mr. _H._ Aye, catch an old Christian without profound humility, if you
can. Believe me, _Sir_, it is nothing but this flesh of ours, those
cursed seeds of the proud apostate, which lie lurking in us, that make
us to think ourselves worthy of the very air we breathe. When our eyes
are opened by the influences of divine grace, we then shall begin to
think of ourselves as we ought to think, even, that GOD is all, and
we are less than nothing. Well, you may cry, O happy temper, could I
but learn of CHRIST to be meek and lowly in heart, I should certainly
find rest to my soul. May GOD, for his dear SON’s sake, give it to
you, to me, and to all our dear friends! “Some like, some dislike the
extract,” you say. I did not do it, to please man, but GOD. “Mr. _W._
is too much engaged in temporals.” Is he? Oh dear Sir, pray that when
I enter the ministry, I may be wholly engaged in spirituals: But “Mrs.
_H._ has been ill, and is now recovered.” GOD be praised for both! Our
Saviour, _Sir_, learnt obedience by the things which he suffered, so
must we. Pain, if patiently endured, and sanctified to us, is a great
purifier of our corrupted nature. It will teach us excellent lessons.
I hope Mr. _H._ has been enabled to learn some of them. So much in
answer to your kind letter. You say “it was too long.” Believe me,
_Sir_, it was much too short; but a line is more than I deserve.
However, I have made out in mine, what was wanting in yours. _My
Mother’s_ journey to _Gloucester_, I fear, is spoiled by the weather.
GOD’s blessed will be done! I hope to be with you about next _Tuesday_
sevennight. “I am missed,” you say; and you may well miss such a
troublesome guest. Well, GOD will reward you richly, I trust. Never
despair of _my brother_; when GOD acts upon the soul, he makes quick
work of it. Be pleased to tell Mr. _M._ that his remissness hath
occasioned me many a sigh, and his return from his relapse, matter of
abundant thanks to GOD in his behalf. Oh let us young, unexperienced
soldiers, be always upon our guard; the very moment we desert our post,
the enemy rushes in; and if he can but divert our eyes from looking
heavenward, he will soon so blind us, that we shall not look towards
it at all. A great deal may be learned from a little fall. But I must
not detain you any longer, than to assure you how much I am, _Dear
Sir_,

           Your and Mrs. _H._’s sincere friend and servant,
                         in our common LORD,

                                                            _G. W._


                             LETTER III.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                             _Oxon, Sept. 17, 1734._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Had the favour of your letter last _Friday_, which brought me the
agreeable news of your and Mrs. _H._’s welfare, together with the
much-desired account of your approving the scheme, inclosed in my
last. Indeed, I did not doubt of its meeting with a candid reception,
from all those persons to whom it was recommended. Their known
concern for religion, giving me sufficient assurance, that nothing
can be unacceptable to them, which any way tended to promote their
improvement in the divine life. It must be confessed, indeed, as you
very justly observed, that we must make a great progress in religion,
and be inured by frequent prayer and meditation, to the extatic
contemplation of heavenly objects, before we can arrive at true
heavenly-mindedness; and, perhaps, after all our endeavours, whilst
our souls are immersed in these fleshly tabernacles, we shall make
but very small advances in so delightful and glorious an undertaking.
But believe me, _Sir_, you cannot imagine, how vastly serviceable the
constant use of all the means of religion will be, in acquiring this
blessed habit of mind. Such, as an early rising in the morning, public
and private prayer, a due temperance in all things, and frequent
meditation on the infinite love and purity of that unparalleled
pattern of all perfection, our dear Redeemer. As for your mentioning,
_Sir_, the degeneracy of the age, as the least objection against our
making further advances in any religious improvement, I cannot by any
means admit of it. The scriptures (as I take it) are to be the only
rules of action. And the examples of our blessed LORD and his apostles,
the grand patterns whereby we are to form the conduct of our lives. It
is true, indeed, that instances of an exalted piety are rarely to be
met with in the present age, and one would think, if we were to take
an estimate of our religion, from the lives of most of its professors,
that christianity was nothing but a dead letter. But then it is not
our religion, but ourselves that are to be blamed all this while.
Would we live as the primitive christians did, we might no doubt
have the same assistance vouchsafed us, as they had. GOD’s grace is
never restrained, and though we should not arrive at those heights of
heavenly-mindedness, as some of the primitive christians were eminent
for, yet, methinks we should imitate them as far as we can, and rely
on the divine goodness for grants of such a supply of grace, as he,
in his good pleasure, shall judge most convenient for us. Be pleased
to send for Mr. _Law’s Christian Perfection_ for me against my coming
into the country, if printed in a small edition. I am, with due
respects to self, spouse, and all other friends,

                          Your’s sincerely,
                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER IV.

                            _To the Same._

                                               _Oxon, Dec. 4, 1734._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Am heartily glad to hear that the _country parson_ has had so good
an effect upon you, and that you are resolved to set in earnest, about
working out your salvation: Be sure quench not these first motions;
but go on vigorously and manfully, without the least regard to what
the world may say; if you can once break with that, you are safe. The
_prayers_, I hope to send you next week. Only let me give you this
caution, not to depend on any advice or book, that is given you; but
solely on the grace of GOD attending it. The book which I have sent to
my brother, and would recommend to you and all my _Gloucester_ friends,
will soon convince you how dangerous it is to be a lukewarm christian,
and that there is nothing to be done without breaking from the world,
denying ourselves daily, taking up our cross, and following JESUS
CHRIST. These things may seem a little terrible at first, but believe
me, they are nothing but suggestions of our enemy to deter us from
setting out; and if you can credit me, mortification itself, when once
practised, is the greatest pleasure in the world. But hold, I shall
transgress the time prescribed me, therefore give me only leave to
add my hearty prayer for your successful progress in religion, and to
subscribe myself in great haste, _Dear Sir_,

               Your sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER V.

                            _To the Same._

                                              _Oxon, Feb. 20, 1735._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Believe you think me a strange sort of a person, for not being so
good as my word in coming down this winter; and what is worse, in not
letting you have a line to acquaint you of my reasons for it. And,
indeed, I am not as yet determined; providence having ordered (I hope)
that this seeming unkindness shall, in the end, prove very serviceable
on all sides. However, though I have been thus hindred, yet, I think
you heard from me last, and am really surprized to find you should,
now so long since, have desired that _collection of prayers_, and
be wholly unconcerned about them ever after. Indeed, they will be of
no service to you, unless you grant me this one postulatum: “That we
must renounce ourselves.” What the meaning of this phrase may be, the
preface to the prayers will best inform you. I did not doubt of its
meeting with but a cold reception, it being (at first view) so very
contrary to flesh and blood. For, perhaps, you may think, that this
renouncing of ourselves, must necessarily lead us (as it certainly
does) to acts of self-denial and mortification; and, that we probably
may be saved without them. And lest you should after all imagine,
(which I trust you will not) that true religion does consist in any
thing, besides an entire renewal of our natures into the image of
GOD; I have sent you a book entitled, _The Life of GOD in the Soul of
Man_, written by a young, but an eminent christian, which will inform
you, what true religion is, and by what means you may attain it. As
likewise, how wretchedly most people err in their sentiments about it,
who suppose it to be nothing else (as he tells us page 3d) but a mere
model of outward performances; without ever considering, that all our
corrupt passions must be subdued, and a complex habit of virtues,
such as meekness, lowliness, faith, hope, and the love of GOD and of
man, be implanted in their room, before we can have the least title
to enter into the kingdom of GOD. Our divine master having expressly
told us, that “unless we renounce ourselves, and take up our cross
daily, we cannot be his disciples.” And again, “unless we have the
spirit of CHRIST, we are none of his.” You will scarce have time, I
imagine, before Mr. _H._ leaves _Gloucester_, to revise, what I have
recommended to your perusal. However, be pleased to let me hear from
you by him, together with an account of your free sentiments about
this matter. I trust (by GOD’s grace) we shall, at last, rightly
understand one another’s meaning. I should be glad to hear too,
whether you keep morning prayers, and how often you receive the holy
communion, there being nothing, which so much be-dwarfs us in religion,
and hinders our progress towards the heavenly Canaan, as starving our
souls by keeping away from the heavenly banquet. I have nothing more
to add at present on this subject, till you favour me with a line,
which, I hope, you will not fail doing by Mr. _H._ who will willingly
bring it to, Dear Sir,

             Your sincere friend and very humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER VI.

                            _To the Same._

                                              _Oxon, March 6, 1735._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Had the favour of your letter by Mr. _H._ and, as desired, I have
made enquiry about the post-masters and clerks of Merton. As to the
former, I hear, that the five senior fellows have each a power to
elect one in his turn, and that there is now a vacancy, but one ready
on the spot to supply it, and no likelihood of there being another
this long while. The latter, are solely in the power of the warden,
and though all the places are at present filled up, yet, there will
be a vacancy next term, so that, perhaps, by a seasonable application,
your brother may get a friend in. Thus much for business. As for the
other particular, specified in the latter part of your last; I find by
what I can gather from your own and my brother’s expressions, as well
as from Mr. _H._’s discourse, that my late letters have met with but
a cold reception; and that you seem desirous of hearing no more of so
seemingly ungrateful a subject, as submitting our wills to the will
of GOD; which, indeed, is all that is implied in that phrase (which
our enemy would represent as so formidable to us) of _renouncing
ourselves_. Alas, Sir! what is there that appears so monstrously
terrible in a doctrine that is, (or at least ought to be) the constant
subject of our prayers, whenever we put up that petition of our
LORD’s: “_Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven._” The import
of which seems to be this. 1st. That we do every thing that GOD wills,
and nothing but what he willeth, 2dly, That we do every thing he
wills, _only_ in the manner he willeth. 3dly, That we do those things
he willeth, only _because_ he willeth. This is all, Sir, I have been
endeavouring to inculcate in my late letters; and though it seems
as clear as the light, upon an impartial and considerate view, yet,
our grand impostor (whose very corruption is having a will distinct
from, and therefore contrary to GOD’s) would fain set it out in the
most hideous colours, as though we were “Setters forth of strange
doctrines;” or proposing some higher degrees of perfection, than every
ordinary christian is obliged to aspire after; whereas, in truth, it
is nothing but the simple and evident language of the gospel. It must
be confessed, that through the corruption of our depraved nature, and
that power, which self-will has, since the Fall, usurped in the soul,
we must necessarily break through a great many obstacles. But, dear
Sir, be not dismayed, the difficulty lies only in our first setting
out. Be but vigorous at the first onset, and never fear a conquest.
The renewal of our natures is a work of great importance. It is not
to be done in a day. We have not only a new house to build up, but
an old one to pull down. But then, methinks, this would be an odd
way of reasoning, “Because a thing requires some pains, I therefore
will never set about it.” No, Sir, rather up and be doing. Exert
your utmost efforts at your first setting out, and take my word, your
strength as well as resolution will increase daily. The means also
which are necessary to be used in order to attain this end, our cursed
adversary the devil would represent to us in the most hideous forms
imaginable. But believe me, Sir, the difficulty here too, only lies
in our first breaking from ourselves, and that there is really more
pleasure in these formidable duties of self-denial and mortification,
than in the highest indulgences of the greatest epicure upon earth.
Give me leave, dear Sir, only to remind you of one particular, which,
if duly observed, will vastly facilitate your future endeavours. Let
the scriptures, not the world, be your rule of action. By those you
are to form your practice here, and to be judged hereafter. Upon this
account, for the future, I should be glad, if you would communicate
what passes between you and me, to none but my brother and your spouse.
And if you have any, the least scruple, be pleased to send me word of
it by a letter in an open, friendly manner; and, by GOD’s blessing,
all things will be yet set right; only be fervent in prayer. As for
what the Rev. Mr. _Hoar_ has been pleased to say, either to you or
Mr. _H._ it is not my business (out of deference, as he is so much my
superior, as to the dignity of his office, his age, and his learning)
to make any reply. I shall only add, what I am sure I can prove,
“That the gospel tells us that there is but one thing needful. That we
cannot sit down content with just such a degree of goodness, and claim
just such a proportionable degree of glory;” but that “we are to love
the LORD with all our souls, strength, &c.” and that “he who endureth
to the end, (and he only) shall be saved.” There is a little treatise
lately come out, which I have made bold to send to Mr. _Hoar_, where
we may be fully convinced by argument deducible merely from reason,
“that GOD is our sole end,” and that barely upon a principle of
prudence, (supposing we could be happy without it) we ought to
press forward, in order to attain the greatest degrees of happiness
hereafter. Whether this letter, Sir, may prove as offensive as the
former, is not my business to enquire. GOD’s will be done in all
things. He, and he alone can (and indeed will, if we are desirous of
it ourselves) work this conviction in our minds. Give me leave just
to add, that I thought it my duty to answer these few objections, that
have been raised against the difficulty of conforming our wills to
the will of GOD, by shewing that the greatest struggle lies only at
our first beginning, and that it is no more than what is indispensably
necessary for our salvation. As for the means to be employed for the
attainment of this end, I shall be wholly silent: Being sensible,
that if you are once fully convinced of the greatness of it, you
will be necessarily carried on to the use of such means as GOD hath
constituted for that purpose. I hope my writing after this manner, Sir,
will not be esteemed a piece of self-conceit, or be an instrument of
unloosing our former band of friendship, which was once designed to be
bound the faster, by tying it with a religious knot. But whether this
proves to be the event, or not, of my telling my friends the truth, I
wholly leave to GOD’s Providence. Be pleased however to favour me with
a line in return, and give me leave to subscribe myself, Dear Sir,

         Your sincere friend and most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER VII.

                            _To the Same._

                                           _Bristol, June 12, 1735._
  _My dear Friend_,

LAST night about eight o’clock, your good spouse and myself came safe
to our journey’s end, and met with a very kind reception from all
parties. After you left us, the ladies grew more serious, and at last
by the assistance of _Mr. Norris_, our discourse ran into a proper
channel. My brother does not propose sailing this fortnight; but tho’
he stays longer than he proposed, yet I hope to be at _Gloucester_
on Wednesday, for methinks my heart is still there, tho’ my body be
at thirty miles distance. On whose account, I leave you to guess. I
cannot help reflecting on Sunday. Did not those sighs, think you, Sir,
proceed from some unusual meditations on the importance of religion?
Were they not some infant strugglings after the new birth? Surely they
were. And I trust ere long, after a few strugglings with corrupted
nature, the Holy Ghost will replenish your heart with comfort and
peace. Proper retirement and solitude are no bars; but rather great
helps to a religious life. We find, our Saviour was led into a
wilderness, before he entered on his publick ministry, and so must
we too, if we ever intend to tread in his steps. As for my brother,
I trust the cares of the world, the desire of riches, &c. will not
always choak the good seed. However, I hope you my dear friend will
not defer so important a thing. But, why do I say hope, when I am
assured you will not. Methinks, I would willingly undergo the pangs,
so you might enjoy the pleasures of the new birth. But this must not
be. All we can do is to sympathize with and pray for each other, which
I hope will not be wanting on either side, as such a close friendship
has commenced between dear _Mr. H._ and

               Your sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER VIII.

                            _To the Same._

                                           _Bristol, Sept. 5, 1735._
  _Dear Sir_,

HOW welcome is a line from a faithful friend? even as welcome as a
shower of rain in a droughty season. But here’s the misfortune, the
very kindnesses of friends may be cruelty: Commendations, or even the
hinting at them, are poison to a mind addicted to pride. A nail never
sinks deeper than when dipt in oil. A friend’s words may be softer
than butter, and notwithstanding, be very swords. Pray for me, dear
Sir, and heal the wound you have made. To GOD alone give glory. To
sinners nothing belongs, but shame and confusion. So much in answer to
one part of your too kind letter. _Mrs. Powell_ you say continues very
ill. No wonder, Sir; desperate diseases must have desperate remedies.
Satan has desired to sift her as wheat; but CHRIST will pray for her,
I trust, and then her faith will not fail. Oxford friends have not
been wanting in letters, and I find I must not stay much longer here.
For some are going to travel, some are dead, and one is married, so
that we must join and warm one another, as well as we can in their
absence. I hope to feast with you at _Crypt_ next Sunday. Amazing,
that ever sinners should sit with their Saviour! To what dignity has
CHRIST exalted human nature. And how did he do it? Why, by humbling
himself. Let us go and do likewise. Give me leave, with due respects
to all friends, to subscribe myself,

       Your and spouses very humble servant and sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._

P. S. If Mr. Pauncefort’s petitions run after this manner for me, I
should be thankful: “That GOD would finish the good work he has begun
in me, that I may never seek nor be fond of worldly preferment; but
employ every mite of those talents it shall please GOD to entrust
me with, to his glory and the church’s good, and likewise, that the
endeavours of my friends to revive true religion in the world, may
meet with proper success.”


                              LETTER IX.

                            _To the Same._

                                          _Bristol, Sept. 18, 1735._
  _Dear Sir_,

AS you did not expect to hear from me till _Mr. B――――d_ came, I hope
you have not as yet accused me of being too dilatory in writing. Now
I have taken the freedom, what can be more proper for me to begin
with, than to return ten thousand thanks for those innumerable favours
conferred on me at your house? I trust they are all registered in the
court of heaven, and will in due time meet with a suitable return
from my all-gracious and good benefactor. Next to this, I imagine you
will enquire, how I like Bristol? As for the place itself, that, like
all others, is indifferent to me, who have here no continuing city,
but seek one to come; and as for the inhabitants, tho’ they teach me
nothing else, yet I may learn this one important lesson, that unless
I am very vigilant, the children of this world, will be much wiser in
their generation, than I, who, by the grace of GOD, hope am a child
of light. Alas! was I half so solicitous to attain heavenly, as they
are worldly riches, I should be rich indeed. That you all may be rich
towards GOD, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir, Your very unworthy,

                but sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER X.

                            _To the Same._

                                             _Oxon, March 13, 1736._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Have now but just time to acquaint you, that GOD gave me a pleasant
and safe journey, and what was still a greater blessing, a joyful
meeting with my zealous, hearty, sincere friends. The alderman bore
my expences, and was very agreeable company; so that on all accounts I
have great reason to thank my good and gracious GOD, and to beg others
to join with me in that important, that delightful duty. You will
not forget retaining your old custom of reading and singing. It’s bad
to leave off a good custom, and the best way to make a progress in
religion, is to persist in, and to improve on the means we enjoy. I
suppose honest James by this time is with you. My hearty love to him,
and tell him, it would do his heart good to see what a number of true
altogether christians here are of his rank. I hope he will let none
of them outstrip him: He must watch and pray against self-indulgence,
sloth, &c. especially if he goes to a place where plenty of all things
abound. My due respects and hearty thanks to _Mrs. H._ and all friends.
I hope none of their kindnesses will ever be forgotten by

                 Your sincere friend in great haste,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER XI.

                            _To the Same._

                                              _Oxon, April 2, 1736._
  _Dearest Sir_,

WHAT a comfort is it for christian friends to relate to each other the
loving-kindness of the LORD? O let his praises be ever in our mouths,
that we may be telling of his salvation from day to day. O _dear Sir_,
I heartily join with you in the delightful duty of thanksgiving. I
hope that you will have every day more and more experimental proofs of
that intercourse which is carried on between GOD in heaven, and saints
on earth.

I must now inform you, that the person, who under GOD has given me the
annuity, is _Sir John Philips_ of London. The occasion of it was as
follows. Upon my coming up, two or three of our trusty friends were
called from us, and being solicitous to keep up our society here,
the gentleman to whom you sent the book, wrote to _Sir John Philips_
and proposed me (alas! how unfit) as a proper person to stay here and
encourage our friends in fighting the good fight of faith. Accordingly
he immediately offered me an annuity of twenty pounds. To shew his
disinterestedness, he has promised me _that_, whether I continue
here or not; and if I resolve to stay at _Oxon_, he’ll give me thirty
pounds a year. If that will not do, I may have more; so that you see,
my dear friend, what a critical point it is. All that we have to do is
to pray, and watch Providence between this and _June_, when I propose,
GOD willing, to enter into orders, and then no doubt my call will be
clear. What makes me to think that this is a call from GOD is, that
it will be convenient for taking my degree, and improving me in my
studies. Whether it be or no, GOD only knows; Father, therefore into
thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou hast redeemed me, O LORD thou
GOD of truth. I approve greatly of your reading HENRY. GOD works by
him here greatly, and may the LORD prosper it in your hands. Good dear
Sir, never leave off watching, reading, praying, striving, till you
experimentally find CHRIST JESUS formed within you. In a particular
manner, my dear friend, watch against all temptations to sloth. When
you receive the sacrament, earnestly endeavour to be inwardly bettered
by it the week following. Live every day as holily as you can. Be
frequent in self-examination morning and evening. Pray earnestly
from your heart. Wrestle with GOD, beg him to hasten the new birth.
Moreover be careful, diligent in your calling, labour hard with your
own hands, that you may have to give to him that needeth. And labour
not so much for the meat that perisheth, as to neglect pursuing that
which endureth to eternal life. O _Mr. H._ my bowels are enlarged
towards you. Believe me to be your sincere, tho’ unworthy friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XII.

                            _To the Same._

                                             _Oxon, April 22, 1736._
  _Dear Mr. H._,

NOW tell me the truth, have not you called me ungrateful? If you have
not, it is more than I deserve. I have nothing to plead but business,
as an excuse for not answering your last kind letter. Well, forgive me
this once, and if I offend so again, then call me ungrateful indeed.
You order’d me to make no acknowledgments for kindnesses received.
You’ll suffer me to ask another favour, if not to return any more
thanks. Be so kind then, dear Sir, to desire your brother to write
to me as soon as possible. My good friend, _Sir John Philips_, has
promised me thirty pounds a year, if I’ll continue at Oxford, and yet
I am in doubt, whether that annuity, and the being appointed to serve
the prison here, will be a sufficient title for orders, therefore I
beg both his advice and prayers. This is all I think that concerns
outward affairs. But this solemn season naturally leads me to say a
word or two on a more important subject, “the death and passion of
our blessed Lord and Saviour.” If I mistake not, you commemorate
it to-morrow at _Crypt_. And blessed be GOD, I do at Christ Church.
And oh that we may commemorate it as we ought; that we may fix our
thoughts intensely on that great examplar and all atoning blood; that
we may grow in love with his meekness and patience, and endeavour
daily to be conformed to his most blessed image. Surely we cannot
grow angry at trifles, when the Son of GOD endured such bitter usage,
without the least murmur or complaint. Surely, we cannot repine at any
dispensations of Providence tho’ ever so severe, when we consider, how
it pleased GOD to bruise our Saviour and lay upon him the iniquities
of us all. Whatever befalls us, is but the due reward of our crimes;
but this Redeemer had done nothing amiss: he was bruised for our
iniquities. I could run through every part of our LORD’s sufferings,
and shew how ♦necessary it is that we should sympathize with him
in every particular. But as it now grows late, and I want a little
time to prepare for to-morrow’s solemnity, you’ll excuse me if I now
only paraphrase a little on the prayer of the thief on the cross.
LORD remember us and pray for us; LORD remember us and rule us; LORD
remember us and prepare a place for us. LORD remember us in the hour
of death, and in the day of judgment. My due respects to all friends,
and am sincerely

                                Yours,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘necesary’ replaced with ‘necessary’


                             LETTER XIII.

                             _To Mr. S._

                                        _Gloucester, June 20, 1736._
  _My dear Friend_,

THIS is a day much to be remember’d, O my soul! for about noon, I was
solemnly admitted by good _Bishop Benson_, before many witnesses, into
holy orders, and was, blessed be GOD, kept composed both before and
after imposition of hands. I endeavoured to behave with unaffected
devotion; but not suitable enough to the greatness of the office
I was to undertake. At the same time, I trust, I answered to every
question from the bottom of my heart, and heartily prayed that GOD
might say Amen. I hope the good of souls will be my only principle of
action. Let come what will, life or death, depth or heighth, I shall
henceforwards live like one who this day, in the presence of men and
angels, took the holy sacrament, upon the profession of being inwardly
moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon me that ministration in the
church. This I began with reading prayers to the prisoners in the
county ♦gaol. Whether I myself shall ever have the honour of stiling
myself a prisoner of the LORD, I know not; but indeed, my dear friend,
I can call heaven and earth to witness, that when the Bishop laid
his hand upon me, I gave myself up to be a martyr for him, who hung
upon the cross for me. Known unto him are all future events and
contingences; I have thrown myself blindfold, and I trust without
reserve, into his almighty hands; only I would have you observe, that
till you hear of my dying for, or in my work, you will not be apprized
of all the preferment that is expected by

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘goal’ replaced with ‘gaol’


                             LETTER XIV.

                            _To the Same._

                                        _Gloucester, June 23, 1736._
  _Dear Friend_,

NEVER a poor creature set up with so small a stock. When the
good Bishop, who ordained me on Sunday, gave out last year in his
visitation charge, that he would ordain none under full three and
twenty, my heart leap’d for joy, for then I thought my friends would
not only be disappointed in their hope of having me enter into orders
so soon; but that I should also have time (as was my intention) to
make at least a hundred sermons, with which to begin my ministry; but
this is so far from being the case, that I have not a single one by
me, except that which I made for a small christian society, and which
I sent to a neighbouring clergyman, to convince him how unfit I was
to take upon me the important work of preaching. He kept it for a
fortnight, and then sent it back with a guinea for the loan of it;
telling me he had divided it into two, and had preached it morning
and evening to his congregation. With this sermon I intend to begin,
GOD willing, next Sunday, not doubting, but that he, who increased a
little lad’s loaves and fishes for the feeding of a great multitude,
will from time to time, in the proper use of appointed means, supply
me with spiritual food for whatever congregation he in his all-wise
Providence shall be pleased to call me to. Help, help me, my dear
friend, with your warmest addresses to the throne of grace, that I
may not only find mercy, but grace to help in time of need. At present
this is the language of my heart,

   _A guilty weak and helpless worm into thy arms I fall,
    Be thou my strength, my righteousness, my JESUS, and my all._

Oh cease not, for I must again repeat it, cease not to pray for

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER XV.

                                        _Gloucester, June 28, 1736._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

ACCORDING to my promise I am now seated to write you a farewell letter.
For providence seems to demand my presence at _Oxford_ immediately,
and therefore I propose being there, GOD willing, on _Monday_ night.
But first let me return dear Mrs. _H._ my heartiest thanks for all
past kindnesses, and assure her, that my incessant prayers shall
never be wanting, that GOD may not forget her labour of love, in that
she has so plentifully administered to me his unworthy servant, and
yet does minister. To-morrow I am to preach at _Crypt_, but believe
I shall displease some, being determined to speak against their
assemblies. But I must tell them the truth, or otherwise I shall not
be a faithful minister of CHRIST. Had providence so ordered, I should
have been glad to have given you the cup of blessing; but since that
favour is denied to me, I am resigned. However, I hope I shall not be
unmindful of you, when I come near your place, nor be wanting in my
prayers, that GOD would mercifully supply the want of outward means to
you, by the operation of his Holy Spirit. I suppose you are, by this
time, pretty well reconciled to _Worcester_, and that providence has
shewn you that we may serve GOD acceptably in any place. Yes, Madam,
let but our hearts be upright towards him, and by faith united to our
dear LORD JESUS, we shall find that wherever we are, he will be with
us, and we shall be with him. So far I had written on _Saturday_ night;
but being detained here in expectation of seeing my brother _James_,
(who has not as yet been so good as his word) I believe I can now
acquaint you that I must set out on _Wednesday_ morning. I preached
yesterday at _Crypt_, and was mercifully supported and assisted,
for which great blessing, I hope you will return hearty thanks in my
behalf. I trust Miss _James_ continues her former earnest desires to
be renewed in the spirit of her mind; for nothing will do but that.
Indeed we may flatter ourselves, that we may go to heaven without
undergoing the pangs of the new birth; but we shall certainly find
ourselves desperately mistaken in the end. For till we are changed,
till we are made meet for, we cannot in the nature of the thing be
partakers of the heavenly inheritance with the saints in light. Let
us therefore never cease praying and striving, till we find this
blessed change wrought in us, and thereby we ourselves brought off
from relying on any or all outward ordinances for salvation. Our good
bishop _Benson_ was pleased to give me another present of five guineas,
a great supply for one who has not a guinea in the world. May the
great Bishop of souls amply reward both him and you, for all favours
conferred on

               Your sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XVI.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                        _Gloucester, June 30, 1736._
  _My Dear Friend_,

GLORY! glory! glory! be ascribed to an almighty triune GOD.――Last
_Sunday_ in the afternoon, I preached my first sermon in the church
of St. _Mary De Crypt_, where I was baptized, and also first received
the sacrament of the LORD’s supper. Curiosity, as you may easily guess,
drew a large congregation together upon the occasion. The sight at
first a little awed me; but I was comforted with a heart-felt sense
of the divine presence, and soon found the unspeakable advantage of
having been accustomed to public speaking when a boy at school, and of
exhorting and teaching the prisoners and poor people at their private
houses, whilst at the university. By these means I was kept from being
daunted over much. As I proceeded, I perceived the fire kindled, till
at last, though so young, and amidst a croud of those, who knew me
in my infant childish days, I trust, I was enabled to speak with some
degree of gospel authority. Some few mocked, but most for the present
seemed struck; and I have since heard, that a complaint had been made
to the bishop, that I drove fifteen mad the first sermon. The worthy
prelate, as I am informed, wished that the madness might not be
forgotten before next _Sunday_. Before then, I hope, my sermon upon
_He that is in CHRIST, is a new creature_, will be compleated. Blessed
be GOD, I now find freedom in writing. Glorious JESUS,

             _Unloose my stamm’ring tongue to tell
              Thy love immense, unsearchable._

Being thus engaged, I must hasten to subscribe myself, my dear Sir,

                             Your’s, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XVII.

                             _To Mrs. H._

                                               _Oxon, July 7, 1736._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

WHAT shall I say in defence of my seemingly ungrateful silence? Why, I
hope, your kindness will accept of the reasons I gave in Mrs. _Well_’s
letter, as a sufficient excuse for it, nothing but those, I assure
you, being the cause of it. Well then, presuming on your kind pardon,
give me leave, (after all acknowledgments of gratitude for kindnesses
received) to bid you once more welcome to _Gloucester_, and to wish
you and Mr. _H._ with all my soul, the greatest comfort, that either
this or the other world can afford you. It’s true, indeed, we must not
expect much comfort here, except what results from a good conviction
that we are in a safe state, by being born again of the Holy Ghost.
This, will afford us inexpressible satisfaction, even on this side the
grave. It will give us ease in pain, because we know, if we bear it
patiently, it will end in glory. This, will make us meek and gentle
under crosses and disappointments, because we know we are taught to
expect them, and that our blessed Master has gone before us in them.
In short, it will make us easy in every station, because we have a
general promise, that all things shall work for good to them that
love GOD. But supposing we were to have no pleasure on this side of
Heaven, yet the thoughts of being happy, and that too for all eternity
hereafter, methinks should teach us to bear up under every calamity
here, not only with submission, but a holy joy. Good GOD! the very
idea of what we are to be in glory, transports me while I am writing.
There, there, Mrs. _H._ we shall see the blessed JESUS, whom our souls
have so eagerly thirsted after in this life, surrounded with glory,
and attended with myriads of his holy angels, who will rejoice at our
safe arrival to their happy mansions, and with repeated echoes welcome
us to heaven. There, there, we shall not only see, but live with him
and enjoy him too, not for a day, a month, a year, an age, but to all
eternity. And who can tell the pleasure, comfort, peace, joy, delight,
and transport, a glorified saint will feel in the possession of his
wished-for, longed-for, ever adorable, ever gracious, blessed, beloved,
triune GOD, and that for ever? Surely the happiness will be so great,
that eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither can the heart of man
conceive the thousandth part thereof. And yet, great as it is, I
not only wish, but have good hope through CHRIST, that not only you
and Mr. _H._ but all my christian friends, and even I myself through
grace, shall one day be partakers of it. The way and means we know.
“If any one, says CHRIST, will come after me (to glory) let him
renounce himself.” _i. e._ make his own will no principle of action,
be no self-pleaser, “and take up his cross” patiently (whether of
sickness or outward circumstances, &c.) “and then let him follow
me,” follow me in a way of duty here, and he shall follow me to glory
hereafter. May we all be such followers of the blessed JESUS! And why
should we despair of becoming such? What is there in CHRIST’s doctrine
or example but that we may all, through the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, imitate him in? Suppose it does oblige us to be a little
stricter than our neighbours? Suppose it does forbid us spending too
much time in the seemingly-innocent entertainments of the age? Suppose
it does command us to be constant and frequent in prayer, in watchings,
fastings, and other acts of mortification? Suppose it does bid us not
to indulge our unruly passions; but to learn of CHRIST to be meek,
patient, and lowly? Suppose it does compel us to redeem our time, to
fill up every day with proper duty and devotion? Yet, what in all this,
that is terrible? Has not such a behaviour a natural tendency to make
us calm, easy, peaceful, happy? And then, why should we refuse so easy
a yoke, so light a burden? I am sure the little (alas! too, too little)
time I have drawn in it, I have found it not galling but healing, and
the longer I bear it, the easier and pleasanter it is. Let us then,
Dear Mrs. _H._ chearfully take it upon us, and then

             _No mortal living of us all can miss
              A permanent, a sure substantial bliss._

    Your sincere, though very unworthy friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XVIII.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                              _Oxon, Oct. 14, 1736._
  _Dearest Sir_,

I Was agreeably detained, as you was pleased to term it, last
_Tuesday_, in reading your kind letter, and had I not been assisted
by the grace of GOD to receive every thing with an equal, undisturbed
mind, perhaps the contents of it might have given me some small
uneasiness. But religion quite changes the nature of man, and makes
us to receive all the dispensations of providence with resignation
and thankfulness. Of this, dearest Sir, I hope you have had an
experimental proof, in bearing up with courage and resolution under
those acute pains the Almighty was pleased to visit you with last
_Sunday_, and with which, perhaps, his infinite wisdom and goodness
may continue to visit you longer. My dear friend (if I mistake not)
used to say, he was afraid GOD did not love him, because he did not
chasten him. Behold then, now the hand of the LORD is upon you, not
so much to punish, as to purify your soul. Not in anger but in love.
Pray therefore in your easy intervals, that you may know, wherefore
the LORD contendeth with you, and that you may not come cankered out
of the furnace of affliction. Offer up every groan, every sigh, in
the name of your dying, risen Redeemer, and doubt not, but they will
be as prevalent as set times of prayer. Our being enabled to pray
when sickness comes on us, doubtless, is to teach us the necessity
of praying always, when we are in health. But, dear Mr. _H._ wants no
such lessons, or excitements, I believe, to prayer. Methinks I could
bear some of your pain for you, if that would give you comfort. But
as it is impossible, O let me never cease most earnestly to beseech my
heavenly Father, that he would sanctify this his fatherly correction
to you, and that the sense of your weakness may add strength to your
faith, and seriousness to your repentance. Poor Mr. _Pauncefoot_, I
find, is visited in a far more grievous manner. Dear good man, surely
the time of his dissolution (I should say of his coronation) draweth
near. See, dear Mr. _H._ through what tribulations we must enter into
glory. Be pleased to give my hearty love and thanks to him for his
last kind letter. Beg him not to cease praying for me, unworthy as I
am. And, I hope, I shall not be wanting in returning his kindness in
the same manner. But alas, I have nothing to depend on, but the merits
of a crucified Redeemer to have my poor petitions answered. But does
dear Mrs. _H._ complain of deadness and coldness in devotion? Alas
poor woman! let her not be disheartened. This is a complaint, which
all the children of GOD have made. And we must take a great deal of
pains with our hearts, must pray often and long, before we shall be
able to pray well. And the only way I can think of, to shame ourselves
out of deadness in prayer, is to censure and condemn, to humble and
bewail ourselves for it every time we go upon our knees, at least
every time we solemnly retire to converse with GOD. But why does dear
Mrs. _H._ so much as think of omitting but once the receiving of the
holy sacrament? Or if satan does put such thoughts in her head, why
does not she repel them with the utmost abhorrence? Alas! should the
devil gain his point here, would not the ridiculing world say, Mrs.
_H._ began to build, but had not wherewith to finish. I have seen too
many fatal instances of the inexpressible danger and sad consequences
of leaving off any one means of grace, not to encourage Mrs. _H._
stedfastly to persevere in the good way she has begun; and would
exhort her, in the name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, to labour daily to
mortify and subdue her corruptions, not wilfully to indulge herself in
any ill habit, custom, or temper, and then assure herself, one time or
another, CHRIST will be made known unto her in breaking of bread. But
what shall I say, dear Sir, about Mr. _W._ &c. &c.? Alas! I find, they
are all in the gall of bitterness, in the very bondage of iniquity,
and all I can do, is to pity and pray for them. I find more and more,
that where true religion is wanting, there is confusion and every
evil work. But why is my honoured mother so solicitous about a few
paultry things, that will quickly perish? Why will she not come and
see her youngest son, who will endeavour to be a _Joseph_ to her,
before she dies? What makes my dear friend and his kind wife, give me
another invitation to _Gloucester_? Alas! have I not wearied and been
expensive enough to you already? I hope to send you, in a short time,
two guineas towards paying for Mr. _Henry_’s Exposition. I wish I
could spare more, but time will bring all things to pass. You see what
a large letter I have written to you to make amends for the many short
ones, I have sent lately. Though I believe you may say of mine, the
quite contrary to what I say of yours; the shorter the better. My due
respects to all friends, and believe me to be, in the utmost sincerity,
Dearest Sir,

     Your and Mrs. _H._’s affectionate friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XIX.

                            _To the Same._

                                               _Oxon, Nov. 5, 1736._
  _Dearest Sir_,

HEREWITH I have sent you seven pounds to pay for Mr. _Henry_’s
Commentary. Dear Esqr. _Thorold_ lately made me a present of ten
guineas, so that now (for ever blessed be the divine goodness) I
can send you more than I thought for. In time, I hope to pay the
apothecary’s bill. If I forget your favours, I shall also forget my
GOD. Say nothing of your receiving this money, only give thanks, give
hearty thanks to our good and gracious GOD for his infinite, unmerited
mercy to me, the vilest of the sons of men. Oh, dear Sir, may such
instances of free grace strengthen your faith, and make you put your
sole trust and confidence in the LORD your GOD. For he hath said,
_I will never leave thee nor forsake thee_. Have not you experienced
his loving kindness and mercy, in supporting you under your sickness?
Methinks I feel you have. May you experience it more and more! Did
not CHRIST give you the meeting last _Sunday_? I hope he did, nay I am
sure he did, if our hearts were duly prepared by faith and repentance
to receive him; but without an entire resignation of ourselves to GOD,
and a thorough renunciation of all worldly and corrupt affections,
all GOD’s ordinances will profit nothing. Your reverend brother’s kind
letter I hope to answer soon, and to send him also a small parcel of
books. The good LORD sanctify them to his own glory, and the good of
souls. I find dear Mr. _Pauncefoot_ is still afflicted, but bid him be
of good cheer. In his latter end he may yet greatly increase. When we
are weak, then are we strong. There is hope concerning his legacy. Let
us in the mean while continue instant in prayer in behalf of this our
dear and worthy friend. Good man! salute him kindly in my name. Beg
his prayers for my unworthy self, and tell him I will write as soon as
possible. The gospel flourishes at _Oxon_. Our society here, blessed
be GOD, goes on well. I received the papers and thank you. How does
dear Mrs. _H._? The divine blessing rest on you both. My prayer night
and day is, that you may be saved. Salute all friends by name. From
Dearest Sir,

               Your unworthy friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER XX.

                            _To the Same._

                                           _Bristol, Feb. 10, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

WHAT shall I say? I cannot be with you this week. Methinks, it would
be almost sinful to leave _Bristol_ at this critical juncture, there
being now a prospect of making a very considerable collection for the
poor _Americans_. The whole city seems to be alarmed. Churches are as
full week days, as they use to be on _Sundays_, and on _Sundays_ so
full, that many, very many are obliged to go away, because they cannot
come in. Oh pray, dear Mr. _H._ that GOD would always keep me humble,
and fully convinced that I am nothing without him, and that all the
good which is done upon earth, GOD doth it himself. Quakers, baptists,
presbyterians, &c. all come to hear the word preached. Sanctify it,
holy Father, to thy own glory and thy people’s good! I hope to be with
you without fail on _Tuesday_ morning. What letters you have, pray
send to, Dear Sir,

                      Your unworthy friend, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXI.

                            _To the Same._

                                       _Stonehouse, April 26, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

BE pleased to send the _Poor Country Curate_, and _Flavel’s Husbandry
Spiritualized_. I know not what to do for want of a clock in the
house. How shall I know, how my precious time passes away? You’ll mind
your promise to come. Here are lovely, solitary, and pleasant walks
to commune with your own heart, and search out your spirit. Has Mr.
_Pauncefoot_ wrote to me? My dear friend _Stratford_’s death affects
me still. Methinks I long to be above, employed as he is. But alas,
I am not ripe for glory; if I was, my heavenly Father would gather
me into his garner. Farewell, Dear Sir; remember I am alone, and pray
accordingly for

                  Your sincere, though weak friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXII.

                            _To the same._

                                          _Stonehouse, May 4, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

WHY does not Mr. _H._ let me hear from or see him? Surely no evil
has befallen either him or his family in their way to eternity. Why
then tarry their horses? Why are they so long in coming to visit the
country, which now looks like a second paradise, and which, to me,
seems the pleasantest place I ever was in, through all my life? Surely
I can never be thankful enough for being sent hither; people flock to
hear the word of GOD from the neighbouring villages, as well as our
own. They gladly receive me into their houses, and I have no let or
hindrance to my ministerial business; and what is still better, GOD
has opened my heart, and enabled me to finish a sermon on “Remember
thy Creator, &c.”――If you will come on _Sunday_ you may hear it
perhaps.――Your sister-in-law talks of being here again on _Friday_;
but I believe it will be more agreeable, if you chuse another
opportunity, that we may have our own conversation. I hope that dear
Mrs. _H._ took nothing ill, that was in my last. I meant it well, and
wrapt up the pill in as much sugar as I could. My hearty love to her
and Miss _J._ Poor Mr. _M._ and Mr. _W._ will set out to morrow, I
suppose. The LORD prosper them and be with them wherever they go, and
make them good soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, and finally bring them and us
to his heavenly kingdom! So wishes, so prays,

                        Your’s affectionately,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXIII.

                            _To the Same._

                                         _Stonehouse, May 11, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Thank you for your last, and bless GOD that you got home safe:
your observations on the weather were pertinent and spiritual. Honest
_James_ and I, were out in the midst of the lightning, and never were
more delighted in our lives. May we be as well pleased, when the Son
of GOD cometh to judgment. What! no news from your brother? Well,
_Stonehouse_ people and I agree better and better. I believe we shall
part weeping. Had I time I would now write to Miss _J._ but I must
away among my flock, and so deny myself that pleasure till another
opportunity is given to, Dear Sir,

               Your sincere friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXIV.

                            _To the Same._

                                            _Bristol, May 24, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

BY the particular good providence of GOD, I got safe to _Bristol_
yesterday by ten in the morning, and was received (unworthy as I am)
with the utmost civility and kindness. I have learnt from hence the
benefit of setting out on our journey to eternity betimes, and what a
pleasing reflection it will be to look back, though not to depend, on
one’s past life, and find a great deal of work done in a little time.
The people here are exceeding kindly affected towards me; and, I hope,
I have seen the effects of my doctrine in the reformation of some
of their lives. Remember me always in your prayers. Accept my hearty
thanks for all favours, and believe me to be,

                             Ever your’s,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXV.

                             _To Mrs. H._

                                              _Oxon, July 14, 1737._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

IF you remember, I promised you a long and particular letter when
I was at _Gloucester_, and nothing hinders but I may now perform
it. Permit me then first, to begin this, as I would all my letters,
with thanks to you and kind Mr. _H._ for your inexpressible favours
conferred on the most unworthy of my master’s servants; and, withall,
to assure you, how incessantly I pray, that the GOD of all grace and
mercy, for the sake of his dear Son JESUS CHRIST, would reward you in
spirituals, for what you have done to me in temporals, and feed your
soul with his heavenly graces, as plentifully as you have fed my body
with nourishing food. But as, in all probability, this will be the
last letter I shall write to dear Mrs. _H._ before I sail, what can
I fill the remainder with better, than by exhorting you, to lay aside
every weight, particularly the sin that does most easily beset you,
and so run with patience the race set before you. I say, the sin
that most easily besets; for unless we lay the ax to the root, unless
we sincerely resolve in the strength of JESUS CHRIST to subdue our
favourite, our darling passion, and spare not one _Agag_, though ever
so engaging, ever so beautiful, all our other sacrifices will avail
us nothing. Suppose therefore, for instance, PASSION be our greatest
foible. A sincere person will never cease night or day, till he is
made meek and lowly in heart. But if it be asked, how he shall do
this? I answer, _first_, let him consider how odious it is in the
sight of GOD, and how contrary to the lamb-like meekness of the holy
JESUS. _Secondly_, Let him reflect how troublesome it must be to
others, (for alas what unnecessary disorders, what needless troubles
doth the passionate person occasion to all that are round about him?)
_Thirdly_, Let him consider how exceeding hurtful and unpleasant it
is to himself; how it ruffles and discomposes his mind; unfits him
for every holy duty, and in short makes him a torment to himself and
a burden to others. Well, after he has thus seen the deformity of his
darling passion, the next enquiry must be, how to get the mastery over
it. The first and grand thing, is to get a true and lively faith in
CHRIST JESUS, seeking for it by earnest prayer. To this, we must have
recourse in all our struggles; for it’s GOD alone, who can subdue
and govern the unruly wills of sinful men, and it is his grace which
alone can enable us to mortify our corrupt passions. But then we must
take care not to rest in general petitions for conquering this or that
corruption; but must descend to particulars. For instance, supposing
I am angry with a servant or husband without a cause; What must I
do? Why, take the very first opportunity of retiring from the world,
and after having bewailed my being angry, earnestly beseech the LORD
of all power and might to enable me to withstand such and such a
provocation for the future, and notwithstanding I should fail again
and again in the very same instance, yet I would again and again
renew my petitions to the throne of grace, and never cease praying
and striving, till instead of a blind, perverse, troublesome passion,
I had the lovely, calm, and delightful grace of meekness and humility
planted in its room. Now would dear Mrs. _H._ take some such method as
this (for I suppose by this time, she guesses to whom all this points)
I dare say, she would quickly find as much difference in herself as
there is between a wise man and an idiot.――And that she may both begin
and succeed in this method, is the earnest prayer of, Dear Mrs. _H._

                    Your affectionate friend, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXVI.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                           _London, Sept. 28, 1737._
  _My Dear Friend_,

I Thank you for your last kind letter and kinder wishes. May they be
turned into prayers, and heard at the throne of grace. Blessed be GOD
for your new correspondence with our _Oxford_ friends. I hope you will
be instrumental to build each other up in the knowledge and fear of
our LORD and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST. GOD still works powerfully here.
People flock more than ever, and shew the sincerity of their hearts
by giving liberally to the poor. I have preached four charity sermons
within this little while, and the collections were larger than ever
were known. Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me; but unto thy Name be the
glory and praise thereof! I am glad, since ♦it’s the divine will, that
my brother is coming up, though my ability as to temporals you know is
small. But I have an all-sufficient GOD to apply to in all emergencies.
I am sorry ♠for my brother’s loss; but I fear he must have greater,
before he is awakened out of his spiritual lethargy. GOD sanctify
all his dispensations to him. I know not why we go not to _Georgia_;
but there is no likelihood of it yet, as I see. Friends universally
dissuade me from going by myself; but I hope it will not be long now,
before we shall launch into the deep. To-night I preach again at _Bow_
church, before the religious societies. GOD opens my heart to compose
freely. O praise him, dear Mr. _H._ for this and all his other mercies,
conferred on, Dear Sir,

              Your and Mrs. _H._’s affectionate friend,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘its’ replaced with ‘it’s’

  ♠ removed duplicate ‘for’


                            LETTER XXVII.

                            _To the Same._

                                            _London, Oct. 25, 1737._
  _Dearest Sir_,

MULTIPLICITY of business prevented my writing to you before. But
though you have not heard from me by letter, yet you may assure
yourself, dear Sir, I never forget mentioning you in my prayers. GOD
knows that I and some other friends intercede most fervently for you,
and very frequently even at midnight. May GOD, for CHRIST’s sake,
hear and answer them! We sail not for _Georgia_ this month. I suppose
you have heard of my _mighty deeds_, falsely so called, by reading
the news-papers; for I find some back-friend has published abroad my
preaching four times in a day; but I beseech Mr. _Raikes_, the printer,
never to put me into his news upon any such account again, for it is
quite contrary to my inclinations and positive orders. GOD still works
here. The collections for the charity schools, in all the churches
where I preach, are very large. All _London_ is alarmed. Many youths
here sincerely love our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and thousands, I hope, are
quickened, strengthened, and confirmed by the word preached. I was
never in better health, and never composed more freely. O praise the
LORD, dear Sir, and pray that I may not be self-sufficient but humble.
I am glad dear Mrs. _H._ is recovered. May she, with _Peter_’s wife’s
mother, arise and minister to JESUS CHRIST. GOD reward her for all
her works and labours of love. Blessed be GOD my hands are full of
business. A third edition of my sermon on regeneration is coming out.
Write to me quickly, accept my hearty thanks and love, and expect to
hear again from, Dear Sir,

                             Ever your’s,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXVIII.

                            _To the Same._

                                                    _Nov. 14, 1737._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Heartily thank you for your last, and having a few moments, sit down
to answer it. Let not my friends trouble me with temporal offers, I
shall accept (GOD assisting me) of no place this side _Jordan_. We
embark for _Georgia_ in about three weeks or a month at farthest. You
wish me good luck in the name of the LORD. I hope to send to you again
before I sail. Mr. _M――――n_ is going amongst the colliers again at
_Bristol_, and a church, I hope, will be built for them. Prosper,
O LORD, the work of his hands upon him!――Mrs. _Farmer_, whenever my
circumstances will admit, shall be paid all that is due to her on
my mother’s account. GOD still works more and more by my unworthy
ministry. Last week, save one, I preached ten times in different
churches; and the last week seven; and yesterday four times, and read
prayers twice, though I slept not above an hour the night before,
which was spent in religious conversation, and in interceding for you,
Mrs. _H._, good Mr. _Pauncefoot_, &c. I now begin to preach charity
sermons twice or thrice a week, besides two or three on _Sundays_, and
sixty or seventy pounds are collected weekly for the poor children.
Thousands would come in to hear, but cannot. This night I preached
a funeral sermon before a most crouded audience, and GOD, I believe,
worked upon the people’s hearts. O pray for me still, _dear Sir_, that
I may renew my strength, that I may walk and not be weary, run and
not be faint. Admire GOD’s free grace in CHRIST JESUS, and let his
goodness to me, the worst of sinners, strengthen your faith, and make
you never to despair of mercy. Farewell. My love to all, and am, Dear
Sir, in sincerity,

                           Your friend, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXIX.

                             _To Mrs. H._

                                            _London, Dec. 23, 1737._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

ONCE more I send you a line. Nothing but an excess of business, should
have prevented me writing to you oftner. Your favours, I hope, will
never be forgotten, and never cease to be mentioned before the throne
of grace, GOD only knows, how earnestly I have recommended you and
your’s to his never-failing mercy. On _Wednesday_ night eighteen of
us continued all night in praises, and praying for you and our other
friends. I know, that passion is the sin, which most easily besets
you, and therefore I always pray that you may have grace given you to
conquer it, and to learn of JESUS CHRIST to be meek and lowly in heart.
Then, and not till then, you will find rest to your soul. Pardon me,
_dear Mrs. H._ for being thus free. Your kindness compels me to it.
Had I not a sincere regard for you, I should not express myself thus.
Besides, it’s the last time, perhaps, I shall write to you in this
world, and therefore would have this letter contain some instructive
hints. We sail, GOD willing, next week. Great things have been done
for us here. Perhaps upwards of a thousand pounds have been collected
for the poor, and the charity schools, and I have preached above an
hundred times, since I have been here. A visible alteration is made
also in hundreds. Last _Sunday_ at six in the morning, when I gave my
farewell, the whole church was drowned in tears: they wept and cried
aloud, as a mother weepeth for her first born. Since that, there is
no end of persons coming and weeping, telling me what GOD has done
for their souls: others again beg little books, and desire me to
write their names in them. The time would fail me, was I to relate
how many have been awakened, and how many pray for me. The great day
will discover all. In the mean while, I beseech you Mrs. _H._ by the
mercies of GOD to pray, that the goodness of GOD may make me humble.
As yet the divine strength has been magnified in my weakness. Many
have opposed, but in vain. GOD’s power conquers all. I am now going
as _Abraham_ did, not knowing whither I go; but I commit myself to the
guidance of GOD’s good providence and spirit. He that has and doth,
will deliver me out of all my troubles. I only wish, I could debase
myself low enough, that I might be more fitted for the high and lofty
one who inhabiteth eternity, to work by. I am a proud, imperious,
sinful worm; but GOD, I hope, in time, will conform me to the image
of his dear Son. He has begun (for ever adored be his free grace),
and I trust, he will finish his good work in me. Out of the money
that GOD has sent me, I will pay all the debts I can. I have sent some
of it to Mrs. _Wells_, with particular orders how to be disposed of;
two guineas are for Mrs. _Farmer_ towards the debt due to her from
my mother. My farewell sermon will be published shortly, with two or
three more. Dear Mrs. _H._ farewell. GOD reward you and your’s for all
your works of faith and labours of love, and grant we may so believe,
and so live here, as to meet in eternal glory hereafter,

                             Ever your’s,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXX.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                            _Margate, Jan. 9, 1738._
  _Dear Sir_,

HITHER the good providence of GOD has safely brought us; our ship
cast anchor near this town, and my dear fellow-traveller and I came
on shore (to our great comfort) to buy some things we wanted. We have
been most courteously treated by the curate of the place, and had
some christian conversation. The winds and storms are blustering about
our ears, and teaching us lessons of obedience to him, whom winds and
storms obey. GOD give us grace to learn them. Mr. _B._ can inform you,
what other particulars have happened to us, since we left you; I need
only add, that the divine goodness attends us wherever we go. Oh dear
Sir! who would but leave their few ragged, tattered nets to follow
JESUS CHRIST? Who would but follow the Lamb wheresoever he shall be
pleased to lead? Pray, _dear Sir_, that I may always do so, and then,
I am sure, GOD will never leave or forsake me. You see, dear Sir, I
have answered your kind letter much sooner than expectation, in order
to express how sincerely I value your friendship, though you differ
from me in some outward modes. Indeed, Sir, I hope the favours I have
received from you and others of your christian brethren, will never go
out of my mind; but I shall often plead them (as I have done already)
at the throne of grace. I would willingly be of so catholic a spirit,
as to love the image of my divine master, wherever I see it: I am far
from thinking GOD’s grace is confined to any set of men whatsoever:
no, I know the partition-wall is now broken down, and that JESUS
CHRIST came to redeem people out of all nations and languages and
tongues; and therefore his benefits are not to be confined to this or
that particular set of professors. I only wish, that I may have grace
given me to preach the truth, as it is in JESUS; and then, come what
will, I hope I shall (as I do, blessed be GOD) rejoice.

You know, Sir, what a design I am going upon, and what a stripling I
am for so great a work; but I stand forth as _David_ against _Goliah_
in the name of the LORD of HOSTS, and I doubt not, but he that has and
doth, will still deliver unto the end. GOD give me a deep humility, a
well-guided zeal, a burning love, and a single eye, and then let men
or devils do their worst.――Dear Sir, I could write more, but nature
calls for rest. Be pleased to give my hearty love to all you and
I know, and acquaint them, how safe I am here; for otherwise the
tempestuous night might put them and others in pain for, _Dear Sir_,

              Your unworthy, though affectionate friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXXI.

                             _To Mrs. H._

                                              _Deal, Jan. 11, 1738._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

HITHER has GOD safely brought us. Pray give thanks on my behalf. We
have had two little storms, the one we escaped by being at _Margate_,
the other we were enabled to bear manfully, and to pray for you and
yours on open deck in the midst of it. All the officers are exceeding
civil. The captain gives me the free use of his cabin, and some
impression is made on the soldiers. I read prayers and preach twice
every day, and, would you think it, the very soldiers stand out to
say their catechism. Oh that they may be soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. GOD
gives me great joy, and excites me to adore him more and more, when
I behold his wonders in the deep. I am but a fresh-water sailor; but
GOD’s strength will be magnified in my weakness, and I verily believe
we shall arrive at the haven, where we wou’d be. Oh that we may all
so pass thro’ the waves of this troublesome world, that at last we
may arrive at the port of everlasting rest! Expect to hear from me at
_Gibraltar_, and assure yourself your favours shall never be forgotten
by

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXXII.

                            _To Mr. ――――._

                                              _Deal, Jan. 21, 1738._

SUPPOSE I answer _dear Mr. ――――_ before I reach _Georgia_, Will he
be angry? I fancy not. I had a mind to write to you again, before I
received yours. For as you have been so liberal in your presents, it
would be unpardonable in me, was I niggardly in my letters. No, my
dear friend, I hope I never shall cease praying for you and yours,
so long as I live. Hitherto I have not. I was praying for you just
as I received yours: I am glad to hear you prayed before you wrote to
me. Surely GOD will bless such a correspondence. O my friend, let us
still wrestle with GOD, that we may be stedfast, unmoveable, always
abounding in the work of the LORD. For it is perseverance crowns our
labours. _He, and He only can be saved._ The world, the flesh and
the devil are three such potent enemies, that we must strive, we must
persevere, if we will gain a conquest. Strive then; let us, my dear
friend, strive as persons striving for eternity. Let us abstain from
all appearance of evil, and avoid all company, that doth not directly
tend to the promoting our spiritual welfare. Whether one of the
societies you frequent, my dear friend, has a tendency that way, I
leave you to judge. I think I have heard you say, it keeps you from
family and secret prayer. If that is not a sufficient reason for
absenting from it, I’ll say no more. I believe you to be sincere, and
therefore, if you consult GOD by prayer and reading his word, your way
will be made clear before you. I only add, that I could wish, instead
of frequenting _that_, you would set up another society of a quite
contrary nature on the same night of the week. I know Mr. ―――― had
some such design on foot, and desired me to mention it. I wish you
good success in this and every pious undertaking in the name of the
LORD. May GOD reward you for all your kindnesses, and make you to
abound in every good word and work! may you walk by faith and not
by sight; and tho’ you are in the world, may you not be of it! I
preach here, GOD willing, to-morrow; there’s likely to be a great
congregation. O pray, that they may not be sent away empty, but
converted by, dear _Mr. ――――_,

                      Your affectionate friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXXIII.

                                              _Deal, Jan. 25, 1738._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Am ashamed of my ingratitude in not writing to you before; but
you’ll not wonder I am ungrateful to my friends, when I tell you I
am ungrateful to my GOD. However, as I always remark’d you for your
charity, I know you will imitate Him you so resemble, and upon my
promise of amendment for the future, will pardon what is past. Oh
dear Sir, how shall I express my gratitude to dear ――――? But above
all, what return shall I make to my ever-blessed REDEEMER for all the
favours he hath bestowed upon me? Help, I entreat you, help me to be
thankful, and as you abound in prayer, abound in praises. I find my
heart too backward to this divine exercise. I am ready enough to ask
for mercies, but alas! how slow to return thanks! Indeed sometimes
GOD touches me from above, and my heart, hard as it is, is melted down
and quite overcome with the sense of his free grace in CHRIST JESUS
towards me. But I want always to go on my way rejoicing; I want the
heart of a seraphim;

                 _I want to sing as loud as they,
                  Who shine above in endless day._

I could almost say more than they, and why should I not return angelic
thanks? But my heart is as yet unhumbled, I see not what I am, what
I deserve, and therefore set not a due value on the divine mercies.
Pray therefore, _dear Mr. ――――_, that I may receive my sight, that my
eyes may be opened, and that seeing what GOD hath done for me, I may
break out into songs of praise, and by such heart-transforming divine
exercises be gradually trained up for eternal uninterrupted communion
with that heavenly choir, who cease not chanting forth day and night
hallelujahs to Him that sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb for
ever. _Dear Mr. ――――_, I can relate to you fresh matter for praise and
thanksgiving; a divine fire seems to be kindling in _Deal_. I preached
on _Sunday_, and this day. The inhabitants are quite affectionate, and
so desirous to hear the word, at my private lodgings, as well as at
public churches, that I am obliged to divide them into two companies.
And GOD, blessed be his free grace in CHRIST JESUS, helps me through.
I suppose my dear friend has heard how affairs go on shipboard. I need
only add, that GOD makes his power to be known among those that sail
with me, and there are great hopes of the captain’s conversion. O pray,
that he may not be an almost, but an altogether christian. Dear Mr.
――――, farewell. It’s late, and many other friends must have a line
to-night. May GOD reward you for all kindnesses, and keep you stedfast
unto the end. Pray return my hearty thanks to all your Brethren; tell
them I sincerely pray for their growth and perseverance in holiness,
and am, dear Mr. ――――,

               Your affectionate, tho’ unworthy friend
                     and servant in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXXIV.

                                 _Gibraltar Harbour, Feb. 24, 1738._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Bless GOD for inclining your heart to take my advice. I know it was
intended well, and I hope proceeded from the spirit of GOD. The many
fatal consequences I have daily seen, proceeding from conversing with
lukewarm christians, makes me jealous of my dear friends, lest they
should be infected by them; and the great tendency I find in my own
heart to catch every infection, makes me to resolve for myself, and
to put others on resolving to keep no set company but with religious
persons. I hope by this time I may wish you joy of settling a new
society with _Messrs. ――――_; and I doubt not but your hearts have
already burnt within you, whilst you talked to one another of the
scriptures of truth. I am sure there is scarce a night has passed over
my head but I have wrestled with GOD for you, and prayed that he would
prosper this work of your hands upon you. My hearty desire and daily
petition at the throne of grace is, that you may be saved; and tho’ I
know not much of your dear wife’s temper, yet I pray, that she may be
meek and lowly in heart, not easily provoked, nor answer unnecessarily
again. I pray, that you both may walk as _Zachary_ and _Elizabeth_ did
before the LORD blameless, that you may love one another, as CHRIST
and the church, and see your children like olive-branches round about
your table. I pray, that you may persevere in the good way you have
begun, that you may abstain from all appearance of evil, and dare
to be exemplarily good. I pray, that you may practice an universal
self-denial, and perfect holiness in the fear of GOD. I could say
much more, but must away to _Gibraltar_; one of the _Majors_ of the
regiments has sent for me, having provided a lodging at a merchant’s
house unknown to me. Oh admire GOD’s goodness! Accept my thanks and
love, and believe me to be, more than words can express,

                 Your affectionate friend in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XXXV.

                            _To Mr. ――――._

                                         _Gibraltar, Feb. 25, 1738._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Should think myself unworthy of your friendship, did I not send you
a line now GOD has brought me in safety hither. I know you will give
thanks, and therefore, GOD forbid I should sin against the LORD in not
informing you of it.――Your prayers have already been heard; for GOD
(ever adored be his free grace in CHRIST JESUS) hath been with us of
a truth. He hath led us through the sea, as through a wilderness, and
brought us to a haven, where I am honoured with many honours.――Any one
that knows _Gibraltar_ would be apt to say, Can any good come out from
thence? Yes, I assure you, there may; for there are some that are not
ashamed of the gospel of CHRIST. About six o’clock this morning I went
to the church, where was assembled a number of decent soldiers praying
and singing psalms to CHRIST as GOD. They meet constantly three times
a day, and I intend, GOD willing, henceforward to meet them. For my
delight is in the saints who are in the earth, and those that excel
in virtue. I have talked with some of them, and, blessed be GOD, can
find the marks of the new birth in them. They pray without ceasing,
have overcome the world, hate sin, as sin, love their enemies and one
another. They glory in the cross of CHRIST, and rejoice that they are
accounted worthy to suffer shame for the sake of CHRIST. O, who would
but travel to see how the spirit of GOD is moving on the faces of
poor sinners souls up and down the world! GOD, I find, has a people
every where; CHRIST has a flock, though but a little flock, in all
places.――GOD be praised, that we are of this flock, and that it will
be our Father’s good pleasure to give us the kingdom!――_Gibraltar_
is blessed with a governor, who hath not absented himself from
public worship, unless when he was sick, for these seven years, and
yet is very moderate towards the dissenters. Both conformists and
nonconformists perform public worship, though at different times of
the day, in the same place: They also have a religious society. The
good LORD prosper this work of their hands upon them. Whenever we
go away, may we leave a blessing behind us. He is a prayer-hearing
GOD.――Yesterday a major of one of the regiments, unknown to me, took
two handsome rooms, and sent for me from on board, desiring me to
lodge in them; and I find the people of the house fear GOD.――“When
I sent you without scrip or shoe, lacked you any thing?” said our
LORD. They said nothing.――O, dear Mr. ――――, I beseech you abound in
thanksgiving, and pray that all these blessings may humble my proud
heart, and make me willing to follow the Lamb whithersoever he shall
lead me. Assure yourself, that you and all your christian friends are
constantly prayed for by, dear Sir,

            Your’s most affectionately in the LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXXVI.

                                         _Gibraltar, Feb. 27, 1738._
  _Dear Sir_,

EVER since I left _Gravesend_, I remember the fulness of your heart.
I have been a constant petitioner at the throne of grace for you, and
intended writing to you before, but was ♦let hitherto. However, GOD
has now brought me safe to _Gibraltar_, and as I have time, I should
think myself inexcusable, did I not send a line to dear Mr. ――――, to
assure him, I forgot not his tears, and wish him to be not only an
almost, but an altogether christian. Dear Sir, you are young and in
the bloom of youth, and it would rejoice my heart to see you triumph
over the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life,
and to become a poor despised servant of JESUS CHRIST. Others, indeed,
may wish you wealth, may wish you pomp and grandeur; but believe me,
my dear friend, these will not, these cannot, make you happy: No,
nothing but GOD can satisfy the heart of man; nothing but an assurance,
that we are born again, that we are members of CHRIST, that we are
united to him by one and the same spirit with which he himself was
actuated. Without this, if we were to have our appetites regaled with
the richest dainties, be cloathed with purple and fine linen, and
fare sumptuously every day, yet the hand-writing upon the wall, the
consideration, that all these things are quickly to be taken away,
would make our visage to change, and our knees, like _Belshazzar_’s,
to smite one against another. Strive then, my dear friend, to get
the spirit of CHRIST, who will keep close to you, when all other
comforts fail; will make you happy here, and unspeakably happy
hereafter.――Never fear the contempt you will meet with; yet a little
while, and they that call you fool, will call themselves so, and curse
that worldly wisdom, which tempted them to evade the cross of CHRIST.
Strange! that any one should let a little reproach deprive them of
an eternal crown! LORD, what is man! How blind as to the knowledge of
his true interest! How backward in the pursuit of his eternal good!
O, dear Mr. ――――, let us not be of the number of those, who desire the
honour that cometh of man; but be content with that which cometh from
GOD. In a short time, we shall have praise enough. Heaven will echo
with the applause that shall be given to the true followers of the
Lamb, and then you will see how sincerely I was, dear Sir,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘lett’ replaced with ‘let’


                            LETTER XXXVII.

                             _To Mrs. H._

                                           _At Sea, April 14, 1738._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

THOUGH through excess of business, and the shortness of the time,
that was allotted me, I wrote but a few lines to you from _Gibraltar_,
yet, what hinders, but that I may send you a longer letter now? It’s
true we are now near a thousand miles from _Georgia_; but as I shall
have an opportunity of sending immediately on our arrival, I chuse
to take time by the forelock, and embrace the first opportunity of
acknowledging my obligations to dear Mrs. _H._ and her husband; for
whom I pray without ceasing. Your past favours are seldom out of my
mind; I plead them daily before GOD in prayer, and hope, if it is ever
in my power, I shall imitate the example of pious _David_ in yesterday
evening’s first lesson, and requite my friends, particularly dear Mrs.
_H._ and her spouse, for the kindnesses they have shewn me. However,
supposing this should not happen, they will in no-wise lose their
reward. But I know you do not care I should dwell on this. You want
to be informed, how GOD has dealt with me since I left _Gibraltar_?
Exceeding graciously indeed. He has comforted me on every occasion,
most remarkably blessed my unworthy ministry on board the ship,
sent us most delightful weather, and made us to ride as it were on
the wings of the wind. We live in perfect love and harmony one with
another. I know but little difference between sea and land, and have
great reason to bless GOD for sending me abroad. A grievous sickness
has been sent amongst us, by which most of the ship have been
chastened and corrected but only two given over unto death; and GOD
hath been so good to me, that, except for a little time after we
sailed from _Gibraltar_, I have been in perfect health, and now GOD
satisfieth my mouth with good things, making me strong and lively as a
young eagle. I have nothing to disturb my joy in GOD, but the disorder
of my passions. Were these once brought into a proper subjection to
divine grace, O well would it be with me, and happy should I be. But
so long as I am angry for trifles, and throw myself into needless
disorders, so long must my heart be like the troubled sea, so long
consequently must I be unhappy. Pray therefore, dear Mrs. _H._ that
I may lay the ax of mortification to the root of my most darling
corruptions, and since I have but little, if any thing, to disturb me
without, O pray that I may meet with no disturbance from myself within.
The farther particulars of my voyage, you will see in my journal,
which I have sent to Mr. _Hutton_, and for the blessings contained
therein, I beseech you to return GOD most humble and hearty thanks.
About _Christmas_ next, GOD willing, I purpose to come to _England_
to take priests orders, and to return as soon as possible to _Georgia_.
In the mean while, dear Mrs. _H._ let us strive to enter in at the
strait gate, that we may be christians indeed, and know what it is
truly to be born again from above, and to be renewed by the spirit
in our minds. Remember me most affectionately to all friends. I am,

                             Your’s, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER XXXVIII.

                            _To Mr. ――――._

                            _On board the Whitaker, April 17, 1738._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

TO assure you I do not forget you, I write to you, as yet, eight
hundred miles off shore. Your honest heart has won my affections. I
make mention of you and your’s continually at the throne of grace in
my prayers, and shall have no greater pleasure than to hear you walk
in the truth. In your last, I think you said, you would desist from
frequenting any other societies, but what immediately tended to the
promoting of true religion, and ere now, I doubt not but you have seen
the benefit of it. I have often pleased myself with the hopes, that
you, dear Mr. ――――, had set up another society among yourselves, and
often have I thought, I felt the benefit of your prayers; for GOD
hath blessed me exceedingly, and brought us on our way rejoicing; and
has shewn me, that he doth not send me abroad in vain.――How GOD will
deal with me at _Savannah_, I know not; however, let my friends be
always lifting up their hands in intercession, and then our spiritual
_Amalek_ will not prevail. Hitherto I have been made to go on from
conquering to conquer. GOD gives me a chearful spirit, and crowns
my feeble labours with success. And why should I despair of future
assistance? Are not these earnests of future mercies? And may I not
expect, when I am duly prepared, to see greater things than these?
Cry therefore mightily unto the LORD, that I may be humble, and that
I may tremble at his word, and then he will delight to honour me. I
live in hopes of seeing you and your wife again (growing in grace)
in _England_. You told me, she desired I would draw her picture; but
alas! she has applied to an improper limner. However, though I cannot
describe what she is, I can tell what she ought to be.――Meek, patient,
long-suffering, obedient in all things, not self-willed, not soon
angry, no brawler, swift to hear, slow to speak, and ready to every
good word and work. But I can no more, I dare not go on in telling
another what she ought to be, when I want so much myself; only this
I know, when possessed of those good qualities before-mentioned, she
will then be as happy as her heart can wish, and afford great reason
of thanksgiving to, dear Mr. ――――,

              Your and Mrs. ――――’s affectionate friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XXXIX.

                            _To Mr. ――――._

                               _On board the Whitaker, May 6, 1738._
  _My dear Friend_,

HOW goes time? I can scarce tell; for I have been some time past,
as one would think, launching into eternity. GOD has been pleased
graciously to visit me with a violent fever, which he notwithstanding
so sweetened by divine consolations, that I was enabled to rejoice
and sing in the midst of it. Indeed, I had many violent conflicts with
the powers of darkness, who did all they could to disturb and distract
me; but JESUS CHRIST prayed for me: And though I was once reduced
to the last extremity, and all supernatural assistance seemed to be
suspended for a while, and satan as it were had dominion over me, yet
GOD suffered not my faith to fail; but came in at length to my aid,
rebuked the tempter, and from that moment I grew better. Surely GOD is
preparing me for something extraordinary: For he has now sent me such
extraordinary conflicts and comforts as I never before experienced. I
was as I thought on the brink of eternity. I had heaven within me; I
thought of nothing in this world; I earnestly desired to be dissolved
and go to CHRIST; but GOD was pleased to order it otherwise, and I am
resigned, though I can scarce be reconciled to come back again into
this vale of misery. I had the heavenly _Canaan_ in full view, and
hoped I was going to take possession of it; but GOD saw I was not yet
ripe for glory, and therefore in mercy spared me, that I may recover
my spiritual strength before I go hence and am no more seen. Oh pray,
my dear friend, that I may not grow lukewarm, or slothful, but arise
from my late bed of sickness, and administer with ten times more
alacrity to my blessed Master, than ever I did before. I would write
more, but my strength faileth me. We hope to be at _Savannah_ on
_Monday_.

                               Your’s,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER XL.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                          _Savannah, June 10, 1738._
  _Dearest Sir_,

ABOUT five weeks I have been at _Savannah_, where providence seems
to intend continuing me for some time. GOD has graciously visited
me with a fit of sickness; but now I am lively as a young eagle. All
things have happened better than expectation. _America_ is not so
horrid a place as it is represented to be. The heat of the weather,
lying on the ground, &c. are mere painted lions in the way, and to
a soul filled with divine love not worth mentioning. The country,
mornings and evenings, is exceeding pleasant, and there are uncommon
improvements made (considering the indifference of the soil) in divers
places. With a little assistance the country people would do very well.
As for my ministerial office, I can inform you, that GOD (such is his
goodness) sets his seal to it here, as at other places. We have an
excellent christian school, and near a hundred constantly attend at
evening prayers. The people receive me gladly, as yet, into their
houses, and seem to be most kindly affected towards me. I have a
pretty little family, and find it possible to manage a house without
distraction. Provisions we do not want to feed on, though we are cut
off from all occasions to pamper our bodies. Blessed be GOD, I visit
from house to house, catechise, read prayers twice and expound the two
second lessons every day; read to a house-ful of people three times
a week; expound the two lessons at five in the morning, read prayers
and preach twice, and expound the catechism to servants, &c. at seven
in the evening every _Sunday_. What I have most at heart, is the
building an orphan-house, which I trust will be effected at my return
to _England_. In the mean while, I am settling little schools in
and about _Savannah_; that the rising generation may he bred up in
the nurture and admonition of the LORD. The LORD prosper my weak
endeavours for promoting his glory and his people’s good. Oh, dear
Mr. _H._ pray for me. For I do, indeed I do, pray for you and your’s.
Remember me to dear Mrs. _H._ and exhort her to perfect holiness in
the fear of GOD. Remind Mr. _W――――_, (since he will not hearken to me)
to work out his salvation with fear and trembling, and beg him to pray
for, though he will not write to, dear Mr. _H._

                          Ever, ever your’s,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLI.

                            _To Mr. ――――._

                                 _Kilrush, (Ireland) Nov. 16, 1738._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Have not forgot you; and as a proof of it, send you this to acquaint
you of my safe arrival here. I know you will rejoice and give thanks,
and pray that my coming to _London_ may be in the fulness of the
blessing of the gospel of peace. GOD has done for me more abundantly
than I could dare ask or think. The seed of the glorious gospel has
taken root in the _American_ ground, and, I hope, will grow up into a
great tree. By my friends prayers I believe it hath been planted. Oh
that they may continue to water it with the same means, and then our
great GOD will give it an effectual increase.――I hope to see you in
a few days at my old lodgings, and to rejoice with you for what GOD
has done for our souls. Indeed, I have felt his power; I have tasted
and known of a truth, that the LORD is gracious! _America_, infant
_Georgia_, is an excellent soil for christianity; you cannot live
there without taking up a daily cross. Therefore, I shall hasten back
as soon as possible after _Christmas_. Oh! that, in the mean while, I
may be enabled to be instant in season and out of season, and preach
with demonstration of the spirit, and with power! Methinks I see
Mr. ―――― lifting up his eyes towards heaven, and silently saying,
Amen.――I hope you will excuse Mr. _D._’s letter. I have forgot his
house, though not his person and his love. No, all your kindnesses,
O my friends, are engraven upon my heart, and I trust will never be
forgotten by, dear Sir,

             Your affectionate friend and humble Servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLII.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                            _London, Dec. 30, 1738._
  _My dear Friend_,

I Am appointed by the trustees to be minister of _Savannah_. The
bishop of _London_ (Doctor _Gibson_) accepts the title, and has
given me letters demisory to any other bishop. I have waited also on
Doctor _Secker_, bishop of _Oxford_, who acquaints me that our worthy
diocesan, good Bishop _Benson_, ordains for him to-morrow fortnight
at _Oxford_, and that he will give me letters demisory to him. GOD
be praised; I was praying night and day, whilst on ship-board, if it
might be the divine will, that good Bishop _Benson_, who laid hands
on me as a deacon, might now make me a priest.――And now my prayer
is answered.――Be pleased to wait on his Lordship, and desire him to
inform you, when I must be at _Oxford_ in order to receive imposition
of hands. Oh pray that I may be duly prepared. It will be a month
before I can see _Gloucester_. I long to see you. I love you and
your’s in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST; but I have scarce time to
subscribe myself, dear Sir,

                          Your’s eternally,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XLIII.

                            _To the Same._

                                            _London, Jan. 27, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

IF I forget Mr. _H._ and his wife, may my right-hand forget her
cunning. Excess of business alone was the cause of my silence. I
sleep but little, very little. Had I a thousand hands, I could employ
them all. I scarce know what it is to have an idle moment. It is late
now. I have just been expounding. GOD fills me with his spirit, and
I must redeem a little time to write to dear Mr. _H._ Indeed, indeed
I love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. O when shall I return your
past favours! I thank you for blessing GOD on my behalf. I want a
thousand tongues to praise him. He still works by me more and more.
Subscriptions for erecting an orphan-house come in a-pace. On _Monday_
sevennight, GOD willing, I set out for _Bristol_, with Mr. _Seward_,
and from thence propose coming to _Gloucester_. Oh that it may be in
the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of peace! Mr. _Howel Harris_,
and I, are correspondents, blessed be GOD! May I follow him, as he
does JESUS CHRIST. How he outstrips me! Fye upon me, fye upon me. How
does my brother? My love to him and all. I long to see you and yours,
and to give you repeated assurances of my being, dear Sir,

                          Your’s eternally,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLIV.

                          _To the Mr. ――――_.

                                        _Basingstoke, Feb. 8, 1739._

  _Dear Sir_,

THOUGH I desired you to write first, yet the love I bear you, will
not suffer me to wait so long before you hear from me.――Just now has
GOD brought us to _Basingstoke_, where I hope an effectual door will
be opened before we leave it, as well as at _Windsor_.――Oh my dear
friend, more and more do I see the benefit of confessing our blessed
LORD before men.――You have not been ashamed of the cross.――No, dear
Mr. ―――― has put his hand to the plough; he will not, surely he cannot
look back; but JESUS CHRIST alone can keep me and my dear friend from
falling. He has begun and he will carry on, he will finish the good
work in our souls.――We have nothing to do, but to lay hold on him by
faith, and to depend on him for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption. Not but we must be workers together with him; for a
true faith in JESUS CHRIST will not suffer us to be idle.――No, it is
an active, lively, restless principle; it fills the heart, so that it
cannot be easy, till it is doing something for JESUS CHRIST.――Methinks
I hear my dear friend crying out, “LORD, evermore give me this faith!”
Believe me, I heartily say, _Amen_. Ask then, my dear Sir, and it
shall be given you, seek and strive for it, and yet a little while and
I shall see you a new creature; your heart I hope is somewhat broken
already.――All praise be to GOD’s free grace in CHRIST.――Go on, my dear
friend, and never cease till you know you are CHRIST’s, by the spirit
that shall be given you. Never fear your carnal friends, renounce
them and every thing else that stands in competition with your duty to
GOD.――What have we to do to know any one after the flesh? Let him, who
doth the will of our Father in heaven, be our brother, our sister, our
mother. For this reason I subscribe myself, dear Sir,

                Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLV.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                                             _Oxon, April 24, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

BLESSED be GOD for working upon your heart by my ministry. I hope the
wish’d-for time will come, when I shall see you full of faith and the
Holy Ghost. Copies may be taken of my letter; but I would not have it
printed, because I intend, when retir’d from the world, to make some
discourses on the subject of free grace. Pray acquaint your mother,
that I interceded for her solemnly last night. I besought GOD, that
she might have her Saviour revealed in her heart; that is the only way
to get above the fears of death. CHRIST in us is the hope of glory.
I rejoice to hear _Mr. Cole_ builds you up in your most holy faith. I
exhort you to go on, and who knows but dear _Mr. H._ may, under GOD,
keep up religion in _Gloucester_. _Mr. Kinchin’s_ conduct in fearing
the church, and giving up the parsonage, has sadly grieved the
spirit of many good souls here; but I bless GOD they are now a little
comforted. Oh dear _Mr. H――――_, my heart is drawn towards _London_
most strangely. Perhaps you may hear of your friend’s imprisonment.
I expect no other preferment. GOD grant I may behave so, that when I
suffer, it may not be for my own imprudencies, but for righteousness
sake, and then I am sure the spirit of CHRIST and of glory will rest
upon my soul. Oh dear _Mr. H――――_, I beseech you, break off from the
world. Shake off every fetter that keeps your soul from GOD, and then
how will it rejoice the heart of, dear Sir,

                          Your’s eternally,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLVI.

                            _To the Same._

                                           _London, April 27, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

I Rejoice to hear of the affection of my countrymen. It is a good sign,
that the word has taken deep root in their hearts. But above all, do
I rejoice that dear _Mr. H――――_ is truly sensible of the free grace of
GOD in CHRIST. Now, my dear friend, you will begin to be a christian
indeed. Blessed be GOD, I hear my honoured M―――― is becoming a fool
for CHRIST’s sake. I do not despair of Mr. _W._ nay, I cannot despair
of any one, when I consider, what I once was myself. Let but GOD speak
the word, and the work shall be done. I always hope well of opposers.
To-day, my master by his providence and spirit compelled me to preach
in the church-yard at _Islington_. To-morrow I am to repeat that mad
trick, and on _Sunday_ to go out into _Moor-Fields_. The word of the
LORD runs and is glorified. People’s hearts seem quite broken. GOD
strengthens me exceedingly.――I preach till I sweat through and through.
All is well at _Savannah_. Brave news from _Gibraltar_. Innumerable
blessings does GOD pour down upon me. Oh that I had a thankful heart.
I love you both sincerely; I thank you both heartily. I salute all our
dear friends most affectionately, and am, dear Sir,

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XLVII.

                            _To the Same._

                                             _London, May 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

THE hour for my imprisonment is not yet come. I am not fit as yet to
be so highly honoured. GOD only knows the treachery of my heart; but
amidst all my late success, I have scarce felt one self-complacent
thought. I speak this to the honour of GOD’s free grace. In about
three weeks, GOD willing, we embark for _Pensilvania_. The trustees
have granted to me land and every thing upon my own terms; the
officers and general are exceeding kind to my friend _Habersham_ upon
my account, so that all things succeed beyond my expectations. I am
sorry to hear of Mr. _W――――_’s conduct――Poor man! The love of money
is rooted in his heart. Where is the honesty he so much boasts of and
relies on? Does not this more and more convince you that nothing but a
true faith in JESUS CHRIST will enable you to act aright? However, he
is not to be envyed. I pity him. Money, thus got, will never prosper.
I rejoice that you and your spouse are content. I wish you both may
have JESUS CHRIST formed in your hearts, and am

                        Ever, ever yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XLVIII.

                              _To ――――._

                                           _Blendon, June 12, 1739._
  _My dear Brethren in CHRIST_,

I Am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, and therefore write to
you this second letter. I find more and more that satan has desired
to have some of you in particular, that he may sift you as wheat, and
will strive if possible to divide and separate you all.――I hear there
is a woman among you, who pretends to the spirit of prophecy, and
what is more unaccountable, I hear that Brother ―――― (whom I love in
the bowels of JESUS CHRIST) seems to approve of her. Need therefore,
great need have you, my brethren, at this time to take the apostle’s
advice, and to try the spirits whether they be of GOD. For the devil
is beginning to mimic GOD’s work, and because terrors will not do,
he is now transforming himself into an angel of light in order more
effectually to gain his point. Brother ―――― also, I cannot but think,
at present is under a spirit of delusion. He, as well as brother ――――,
I believe imagines there will be a power given to work miracles,
and that now CHRIST is coming to reign a thousand years upon the
earth.――But alas! what need is there of miracles, such as healing
sick bodies, and restoring sight to blind eyes, when we see greater
miracles every day done by the power of GOD’s word? Do not the
spiritually blind now see? Are not the spiritually dead now raised,
and the leprous souls now cleans’d, and have not the poor the gospel
preached unto them? And if we have the thing already, which such
miracles were only intended to introduce, why should we tempt GOD
in requiring further signs? He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And as for our LORD’s coming at this time to reign upon the earth,
I answer, it is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the
Father hath put in his own power.――That a great work is begun is
evident, that it will be carried on I doubt not; but how it will end,
I know not, neither do I desire to know. It is sufficient for me to
do the work of the day in its day, and to rest satisfied in this,
that all will end in GOD’s glory. Lately, brother ―――― told me he was
shortly, he believed, to be called to some public work.――I pray GOD
he may not run before he is called. To teach, I know, is a pleasing
thing; but to begin to teach too soon or without a commission, will
be destruction to ourselves, and of ill consequence to others. Uzzah
might mean well, when he touched the ark, but his good intention did
not preserve him from the just judgments of GOD. Be not many masters,
says the apostle. Oh that that verse was deeply engraven on the tables
of our hearts! My dear brethren, be not offended at this plainness
of speech. I would all the LORD’s servants were prophets, but then
I would not have people think themselves prophets of the LORD, when
they are only enthusiasts――If Mr. ―――― is acted by a good spirit,
why is he not patient of reproof? Why does he fly in a passion, when
contradicted? Why does he pretend to be infallible, and that GOD
always speaks in him? May GOD give us all a right judgment in all
things. Pure unfeigned love causes me to use this freedom. Many of
you GOD has worked upon by my ministry, and therefore I would not
have you ignorant of satan’s devices. O beware of him at this time. Do
not conceive prejudices against each other. Do not dispute, but love;
purge out the old leaven from amongst you. Have no fellowship with any
that converse with Mr. ――――. If they have a mind to depart from you,
let them depart. Do you build up each other in your most holy faith.
My dear brethren,

           I am your common servant in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XLIX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. ――――_.

                                         _Leachlade, July 18, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

THE scene this morning much affected me; you both put me in mind,
how that happy pair, _Adam_ and _Eve_, looked when arraign’d by the
Almighty after having eaten the forbidden fruit. Behold the same
remedy reached out to you as to them.――The seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpent’s head.――Look up to him whom you have pierced.――He
will heal your backslidings and love you freely.――Had he not loved you
both, both of you ere now would have been given over to a reprobate
mind. I know the time, when you both were enlightned, when you
tasted the good word of GOD, and felt the powers of the world to
come.――Honour, falsely so called, has caused you to draw back, but I
believe not unto perdition. JESUS is still striving with your heart.
Come to him by faith, renounce the world, and he will yet delight to
honour you. “Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation.”
Mention not old things, let all things become new. I love both of you
from my heart. Come forth, and be ye separate, saith the LORD almighty.
Break with the world at once, and you shall become fools for CHRIST’s
sake. What if your wife sent some such letter as the following to her
parents.


  _Honoured Father and Mother_,

THE contents of this letter will surprize you, but I can no longer
halt between GOD and the world; the happy convictions, that GOD once
put into my heart, now arise in my mind, I will no longer be an almost
christian. I am resolved to become a fool for CHRIST’s sake. Blessed
be GOD Mr. _M――――_ is like-minded.――Hitherto have I hindered him in
his spiritual progress, GOD forbid I should do it any longer. Hence
forward will we go hand in hand together, and naked follow a naked
CHRIST.――

                  Dearest Mr.――――, I am ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER L.

                                            _London, July 23, 1739._
  _Dear Madam_,

YOUR letter filled me with joy and with pity. Pity, to see you tempted,
joy, to find you are thought worthy of enduring temptation. Satan hath
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. But be not afraid,
JESUS CHRIST is praying for you, and your faith shall not fail. Your
master hath been in the wilderness before you, and knows by experience,
how to succour those that are tempted. Lift up then the hands that
hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees. Infidel books have
poisoned your understanding, and rivetted great pride therein. Strong
temptations are necessary to mortify that pride, and to teach you that
lowliness of heart, which our LORD calls all that are weary and heavy
laden to learn of him. Look up then to JESUS, the author and finisher
of your faith. He will send you help in every time of need. Indeed
he will never leave you, nor forsake you. Follow him as the poor
_Syrophœnician_ woman did, and though he may now turn away his face
seemingly for a while, yet he will always support you inwardly by a
living faith, and shortly give you the spirit of adoption, whereby
you will be enabled to cry, “Abba, Father.” I speak this by happy
experience. I have mourned, but now I am comforted. I have gone
through the spirit of bondage, and, for ever be adored GOD’s free
grace, he has given me the spirit of adoption. And that you also will
have this in GOD’s due time and way, is the firm belief of

            Your unworthy brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER LI.

                                            _London, July 23, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

I Wish you joy of your new-born son. Oh that it may be made a real
child of GOD. I purpose, GOD willing, to stand to my promise, either
in person, or by proxy. I know not yet, how providence will be pleased
to dispose of me. I have written to the Lords of the Admiralty for
a licence. Saturday evening next, I hope you will see _Mr. Charles
Wesley_. He intends to preach at _Gloucester_, _Raindwick_, &c.
Pray desire _Mr. Cole_ and our other dear friends to appoint places.
Matters go on most bravely here. I think people are ten times more
affected than ever. The audiences full and numerous, and they give
their mites for the orphan house with a chearful and ready heart.
Have you heard how I preached upon the stage among the cudgel players
at _Basingstoke_, and got a blow? Both I and my companions were also
turned out of our inn, and in danger of being beaten heartily. Blessed
be GOD! My sermon comes out on _Wednesday_. Heartiest love to dear
Mrs. H――――. That JESUS CHRIST may be fully formed in both your hearts,
is the prayer of,

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LII.

                                            _London, July 24, 1739._
  _Honoured Sir_,

THOUGH but a child in grace, and a novice in the things of GOD, yet
I could not escape this opportunity of shewing you, how dear you are
to my soul. Though unknown in person, yet you have long since been
known to me in spirit. I hoped to have seen you ere I left _London_.
I hasted up to town hoping to have some spiritual gift imparted to
me by that means, but I was not worthy of it, I was not prepared for
such a blessing.――You went before I came. A great work of GOD is doing
here. The LORD JESUS gets himself the victory every day; free grace
compels poor sinners to come in. Our brother ―――― can inform you of
particulars. As for my own soul, GOD mightily strengthens me in the
inward man, and gives me often such foretastes of his love, that I
am almost continually wishing to be dissolved, that I may be with
CHRIST.――But I am only beginning to begin to be a christian.――I
must suffer also, as well as do for my dear Master. Perhaps a
storm is gathering. I believe GOD will permit it to fall on my head
first.――This comes then, honoured Sir, to desire your prayers, that
none of those things may move me; and that I may not count even my
life dear unto me, so that I may finish my course with joy, and the
ministry which I have received of the LORD JESUS. Though I die for him,
yet, I beseech you, honoured Sir, to pray that I may not in any way
deny him. But what am I doing? I fear, honoured Sir, I am too free.
A sense of your humility and love for the blessed JESUS makes me thus
open. How should I rejoice, if you would honour me with a line.――I
am young, and therefore a word of exhortation and advice, would much
profit, honoured Sir,

          Your very humble servant, in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LIII.

                                            _London, July 25, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

NOT a want of love, but of time, has obliged me to shorten my late
letters. Had I an hundred hands I could employ them all. The harvest
is very great. I am ashamed I can do no more for him, who hath done
so much for me; not by way of retaliation, but gratitude. Fain would
I love my master, and will not go from him; his service is perfect
freedom; his yoke is easy, his burden light. Still he is pleased to
shew us greater things. Every day affords fresh instances of the power
of his word. I am now about to attack satan in one of his strong-holds,
if I perish.――To-night I preach, GOD willing, where an horse-race
is to be. I find my Master strengthens me for the work. O, dear Sir,
pray for me, that my faith fail not, and that my zeal be tempered with
knowledge. Our brother ―――― will prove an agreeable correspondent.
If business prevents my writing, he will inform you what happens from
time to time to, dear Sir,

               Your most affectionate in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LIV.

                                            _London, July 26, 1739._
  _Rev. Sir_,

JUST now I received your kind letter, and am endeavouring to catch a
few moments to answer it. I thank you for your encouraging hints. O!
dear Sir, continue to exhort, and provoke me to love and to good works,
that I may with patience run the race that is set before me. Hitherto
my dear Master magnifies his strength in my weakness. Ever since
he honoured me to suffer a little reproach for his name’s sake, at
_Basingstoke_, he has caused me to rejoice with exceeding great joy.
My spirit was stirred within me. Methinks I could willingly have died
to have borne my testimony against the lying vanities, and devilish
entertainments of this generation. By the help of my Master, I will
go on and attack the devil in his strongest holds. O pray, dear Sir,
that my zeal may be always tempered with true christian prudence. It
would grieve me, should I bring sufferings causelessly upon myself.
A trying time, perhaps, is at hand. O that I may be found faithful!
If providence permits, I will perform my promise. I am blind, I am a
child, I know nothing. I only desire the whole will of GOD may be done,
in, by, and upon, dear Sir,

              Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer
                       in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER LV.

                                            _London, July 26, 1739._
  _Sir_,

I Received your kind letter, but must beg to be excused from
dissuading your son to go with ――――. The employment in which he is
engaged will, in the end, if faithfully improved, tend much to GOD’s
glory and his own good. He now sits by me; I read over your letter to
him, and he continues as resolute as ever. The being _disinherited_
does not terrify him at all. He has a more abiding inheritance, and is
willing naked to follow a naked CHRIST.――Dear Sir, let me advise you
to do nothing rashly. If you can pray for a blessing on your will when
you are about to disinherit your son, I shall wonder. Have a little
patience, and then you will find that your son is about to act wisely.
If I thought otherwise, no one would be more forward to dissuade him,
than, Sir,

                      Your very humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LVI.

                                            _London, July 31, 1739._

OH that my head was water and my eyes fountains of tears, that I might
weep over my dear Mr. ――――. What? And has my familiar friend, who has
been dear to me as my own soul, has he taken part with, and gone back
to the enemy? Surely it cannot be!――And yet I must believe it.――But
if any one had told my dear friend, that he would have behaved thus,
would he not have cried out, “Is thy servant a dog that he should
do this?” Oh, my dear friend, I am in pain for you! Alas! who hath
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? You did run well;
who, or what hath hindered you? Not a fear of man, I hope; not a
desire of that praise, that cometh of man. I know the time when my
dear friend’s heart stood stedfast. I know the time when my dear
friend was willing to be accounted a fool for CHRIST’s sake, and chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin, of false politeness, for a season. And why should I
despair of my dear friend now? No, I know JESUS CHRIST was set for the
falling and rising again of many in _Israel_. Our LORD, I trust, has
prayed for you, and I hope your faith will not totally fail. Forgive
me, I must stop and sigh: GOD forbid I should be called, at the great
day, to say, that my dear Mr. ―――― put his hand to the plough and
turned back unto perdition. Good GOD! the thought strikes me as though
a dart was shot through my liver. Return, return. My dear friend, I
cannot part from you for ever. Do not speak peace to your soul, when
there is no peace. Do not turn factor for the devil. Do not prejudice
or hurt my brother, and thereby add to the grief you have already
occasioned.

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LVII.

                                           _Bristol, July 31, 1739._
  _My dear Brother_,

BLESSED be GOD for bringing you in safety home.――He is a GOD hearing
prayer. May he sanctify our meeting. I hope to see you here this week.
I shall set out for _Deal_ on _Monday_.――I long to hear how the soul
of my dear brother prospers.――I long to embrace you in these unworthy
arms.――Methinks I could now sing my nunc dimittis with pleasure, if my
eyes could see my dear brother’s salvation. I hope you have conversed
with Mr. _Wesley_. It will require some degree of boldness to own
either of us before men. GOD vouchsafes to honour us: No wonder our
names are cast out as evil.――Dear Mr. ――――, I hear, is staggered with
the fear of man.――Sister, I trust, is in a good way. When shall I see
you? Come, Oh come and warm my heart, by telling me what GOD hath done
for your soul. Eternity will be too short to praise him for what he
has done for

                      Your affectionate brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LVIII.

                                           _London, August 3, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THIS morning I received yours, and though I leave _London_ this
evening, yet I cannot but snatch a few moments to send you an answer.
I love all that love our LORD JESUS CHRIST. The spirit of CHRIST, with
me is the center. I love the man, and you in particular, though in all
things he may not follow with me. I rejoice there is a revival of true
religion in _Scotland_. The spirit of GOD is moving on the faces of
thousands of souls in _England_. The word runs very swift, and satan
falls like lightning from heaven. GOD hath sent me into the highways
and hedges, to compel poor sinners to come in; many are left to water,
what GOD hath been pleased to plant; I doubt not of his giving a great
increase. But I am a child, I cannot speak, yet GOD will magnify his
free grace. GOD will work, and all oppositions must forward, but not
hinder it.――Inclosed I have sent you a sermon just published.――You may
judge of my principles from that. The picture I highly honour.――May
I follow them as they follow CHRIST. I am no friend to sinless
perfection.――I believe the being (though not the dominion) of sin
remains in the hearts of the greatest believers.――Time and business
will not give me leave to enlarge.――Besides, I am but a novice in
the school of CHRIST; and therefore most earnestly beg your prayers,
that I may grow in the knowledge of our common LORD. At his call,
I am now going abroad, and expect to suffer many things ere I return
home.――Reverend and dear Sir, I wish you much success in the name of
the LORD, and am

             Your brother and servant in the best bonds,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LIX.

                                           _London, August 3, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Cannot leave _London_ without answering your last letter. I am
convinced that GOD calls me now to _Georgia_, and so are our friends.
GOD’s ways are like the great deep.――He will go a way by himself.
Exitus acta probat. The prophecy you mention, I dare not apply to
myself. What am I, that GOD should so delight to honour me? However,
I believe the LORD will work a great work upon the earth. Whatever
instruments he shall make use of in effecting it, I care not. If
CHRIST be preached, if my dear LORD be glorified, I rejoice; yea, and
will rejoice. I wish all the LORD’s servants were prophets. Oh, dear
Sir, my heart is now melted down with a sense of the divine love!
Never was a greater instance of GOD’s free grace in CHRIST. What am I,
O LORD, that thou shouldest delight to honour me? Even so, Father, for
so it seemeth good in thy sight! Dear Sir, I could now write all day;
but other business demands my attendance.――Yet a little while, and we
shall sit down in the kingdom of GOD for ever. Dear Sir adieu. Oh give
thanks, give thanks, and pray for

             Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER LX.

                                          _Blendon, August 6, 1739._

AND would not dear Mr. ―――― stay for my last letter? What, is he
retired into the country to learn how to forget his GOD? Is he got
into favour with the polite world? Are not these sad symptoms, that
my dearest Mr. ―――― is falling away a-pace? He runned into one extreme
lately, and now satan is driving him into another. Did not I forwarn
you of this? O my dear friend, my brother, return to your first
love, otherwise you will find the spirit of GOD deserting you more
and more every day. Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. But I can say
no more.――Perhaps I am troublesome. However, give me leave to weep.
Permit me to pray for you. Though you are now dead comparatively, yet,
I trust, you will be alive. Though now seemingly lost, yet surely you
shall be found again. GOD only knows how such news would rejoice the
heart of, dear Sir,

             Your affectionate friend in the best bonds,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXI.

                                             _――――, August 7, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Thank you most heartily for your last: Had you been more particular,
I should have thanked you still more. May GOD reward you for watching
over my soul! Pride and selfishness are the tempers of the devil. By
the help of my GOD I will never rest till my Master gives me power
to overcome them. It is difficult, I believe, to go through the fiery
trial of popularity and applause untainted. Blessed be GOD, I am now
sweetly retired. O help me, my dear Sir, by your prayers, as well as
your advice, and believe me desirous to subscribe myself,

          Your’s most affectionately in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXII.

               _On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

YOUR kind letter gave me much satisfaction. It breathed the language
of one, who is a Boanerges in the church of GOD. Excess of business
prevented my answering it sooner. As I am now retired from a public
life, I trust I shall have time to try my heart and search out my
spirit. Forget me not, dear Sir, when you are praying for all those,
who travel by land and by water, when storms and winds are blowing
over me. I hope I shall always carry you, and others of my dear
friends in _Wales_, upon my heart, whenever I go in and out before the
LORD. It would rejoice my soul to hear from you, when abroad. Exhort
me, oh exhort me, to be valiant for the truth. Bid, oh bid me, dear
Sir, to be mindful of a dying and risen JESUS.――Bid me to remember the
riches of his free grace in pulling me as a brand out of the fire, and
exhort me to lay down my life for his sake.――Brother _Harris_, I find,
has come off triumphantly.――The hour of suffering is not yet come. GOD
prepare us all for it! I expect to suffer for my blessed master’s name
sake. But, wherefore do I fear? My master will pray for me.――Dear Sir,
adieu. I know you not in person. Perhaps I may never see your face in
the flesh. However, I shall see you in heaven, and then you shall see
how sincerely I now subscribe myself,

         Your unworthy brother and fellow-servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXIII.

               _On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739._
  _Dear Madam_,

I Cannot think of your favours, and yet forbear writing a letter of
thanks. I cannot think of your parting tears, and not inform you, how
sincerely I pray GOD to comfort and refresh your soul.――Oh Madam, your
kindness to such a dead dog as I am, quite surprizes me. How much more
ought you and I, and all mankind, to adore the unspeakable goodness
of our heavenly Father, who has so loved the world, as to give his
only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Dear Madam, never rest till you have a
lively faith in CHRIST JESUS. GOD has put into your heart good desires
after it. Continue instant in prayer; apply to JESUS CHRIST, as a
poor sinner, and yet a little while, and dear Mrs. ―――― shall be a
christian indeed. Hasten O LORD, that blessed time. Oh let thy kingdom
come, in full power, into this thy handmaiden’s heart! Innumerable
temptations surround you, to make you take up your rest here. But, I
hope, _Madam_, you will be upon your guard, and let nothing be thought
of, or done, by you, which may any way tend to indulge the lust of the
eye and the pride of life. Simplicity is the very spirit of the gospel;
therefore, the more we learn CHRIST, the more regardless we shall
be of worldly vanities. GOD of his infinite mercy make you a widow
indeed! You see, Madam, how freely I have wrote to you. It is because
I value your welfare.――It is the best return that can be made, for all
favours conferred on, Madam,

     Your most obliged friend and servant in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXIV.

               _On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739._
  _Dear Madam_,

YOUR affectionate parting, and the tears I observed you to shed, even
when I was at a distance from you, made me almost ready to cry out
“What mean you to weep and to break my heart?” Oh may our dear LORD
put your tears into his bottle, and reward you a thousand fold for all
the kindnesses you have shewn to me! Indeed I am less than the least
of his servants. But yet, so loving is my dear Master, that he will
not let a cup of cold water given in his name, to pass by unobserved
or unrewarded. When partaking of your bounty of flour, I hope I shall
pray that you and your’s may eat bread in the kingdom of GOD. You
have all good desires; I hope you are not far from the kingdom of
GOD.――Oh let there not be any thing lacking. Give GOD your hearts,
your whole hearts; let JESUS CHRIST’s be your whole wisdom, your
whole righteousness; and then he will be your whole sanctification
and eternal redemption. I write this from my floating habitation, to
assure you how sincerely I am

      Your most obliged friend and affectionate humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXV.

                          _On board the Elizabeth, August 14, 1739._
  _My dear Mr. ――――_,

AT length we are embarked; our ship is now going to the _Downs_.――Yet
a little while, and, GOD willing, I shall see you once more in the
flesh. My family consists of more than twelve, besides two children;
I hope all are desirous to know CHRIST. GOD strengthens me mightily
in the inner man. The sermon I have sent you is one of my extempore
sermons.――The journal will acquaint you with particulars.――My brother,
the captain, hath been with me this last week.――If he leaves off
disputing, and will come to CHRIST as a poor lost sinner, he will do
well.――The bishop of _London_ has lately wrote against me; I trust GOD
hath assisted me in writing an answer.――It is now in the press.――All
the self-righteous are up in arms.――My Master makes me more than a
conqueror through his love. Mr. ―――― has about forty societies in
_Yorkshire_. Both the Mr. _Wesley_’s go on well.――Go where you will,
religion (either for or against it) is the talk.――Probably a suffering
time will come. You will not be ashamed of me, though I should be a
prisoner. Perhaps you will be put to the trial: But how does my dear
friend’s heart? Have you found CHRIST? Does he live in you, so as to
be the alpha and omega, the beginning and end of all your actions?
Are you enlightened to see the exceeding great riches and fulness of
his grace? Oh how will it rejoice my soul to see you a proficient in
the school of CHRIST? How will it delight me to see your little flock
pressing towards the mark.――Soon after this reaches _Georgia_, I hope
to see you.――My stay will be as short as possible at _Philadelphia_.
I must not delay coming to my dear, though poor charge.――I expect
to find _Savannah_ almost desolate; but our extremity is GOD’s
opportunity. I believe it will lift up its drooping head.――For the
present, my dear friend, farewell.

                Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXVI.

       _On board the Elizabeth going to the Downs, August 15, 1739._
  _My dear Brother_,

THE agony I was in at your departure, and the many strong cryings and
tears which I offered up to GOD afterwards, plainly shew, that I love
you in sincerity and truth. Though I am now about to launch into the
great deep, yet I must write you a parting line. I cannot but think
you will come to CHRIST in earnest. GOD has most remarkably met you
by his providence.――His spirit has been striving with you, and I doubt
not but it will get the victory over your carnal reasonings, and the
rebellion of a depraved heart. But do not, my dear brother, I beseech
you, dispute against your own happiness.――Be not unwilling to confess
that you are not yet a christian. Remember what our LORD hath said:
“Whosoever receiveth not the kingdom of GOD, as a little child,
shall in no-wise enter therein.”――I beseech you, by the mercies of
GOD in CHRIST JESUS our LORD, to leave off _disputing_. You have
been, I think, frequently convinced; but nature, I find, has as
frequently interposed, and persuaded you that you had gone far
enough already.――But does not my dear brother find, that he yet lacks
something? Have not his tempers and corruptions; nay, hath not sin
itself dominion over him? Are his affections weaned from the world?
Does he feel himself a poor lost sinner? Is he willing the LORD JESUS
should be his whole righteousness? Is he convinced of the freeness,
as well as of the riches of his grace? You see, my dear brother,
how freely I deal with you. It is because I love you with a peculiar
love.――Never did my heart exult at the sight of any relation, as at
the sight of you; Surely GOD intends to give me my dear brother. He
is already an almost; hasten, O LORD, that blessed time, when he shall
be an altogether christian, and let thy kingdom, with full power, come
into my dear brother’s heart!――How shall I say farewell? If you have
opportunity, pray write to

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXVII.

       _On board the Elizabeth going to the Downs, August 16, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Thank GOD for his goodness to brother _Howell Harris_. I thank
you for informing me of it. The storm is diverted for a while, but I
expect it to break upon my head one time or another. GOD has, for a
while, prepared me a place of refuge in the ship, from whence I write
this. Oh beseech him, that I may improve the retirement by searching
out my spirit. I have almost forgot, that I was in the world. My
family on board is quite settled, and we live and love like christians.
GOD only knows where you and I shall meet again; whether in time
or eternity. However, this we know, that both must be tried to the
uttermost. Inward and outward afflictions await us, and all the
children of GOD. I am now reading the book of martyrs. They make me
blush to think how little I suffer for CHRIST’s sake. They warm my
heart, and make me think the time long till I am called to resist
even unto blood: But I fear the treachery of this heart of mine. Dear
Mr. ――――, to your past, add one more favour, “pray that I may be found
faithful.” I trust I shall have a sweet remembrance of you and my
other dear friends, when I go in and out before the LORD. Salute them
most affectionately. Exhort them, oh exhort them to continue in the
grace of GOD; and forget not to write to, dear Mr. ――――,

          Yours most affectionately in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXVIII.

                                     _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._¹
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THOUGH business prevents my corresponding with you so frequently as
I did when in _England_, yet what can hinder me now, but a want of
gratitude and love? Accept then, dear Sir, my sincere, though late
thanks, for all favours conferred upon me, and assure yourself, I
remember both you and your beloved people at the throne of grace.
Nothing will rejoice me more than to hear, that the good pleasure of
the LORD prospers in your hand. Oh dear Sir, what a gracious Master do
we serve! His loving-kindness still prevents, accompanies, and follows
me. He has not given me over unto death, but is still pleased to dig
and dung round me, and not cut me down as a cumberer of the ground. I
long to be purged, dear Sir, that I may bring forth more fruit. Since
my retirement from the world, I have seen more and more how full I am
of corruption. Nothing could possibly support my soul under the many
agonies which oppressed me, when on board, but a consideration of
the freeness, eternity, and unchangeableness of GOD’s love to me, the
chief of sinners.――In about a twelvemonth, probably, I shall return
again to my native country. Satan no doubt will endeavour to stir up
all his forces against me. By the help of my GOD, I will once more
come forth with my sling and my stone.――I shall wait with impatience
to hear how the work goes on in my absence. I trust, GOD, by this time,
has sent forth more labourers into his harvest. I heartily wish all
the LORD’s servants were prophets. I verily believe, the right-hand
of the LORD will not only have the pre-eminence, but also bring
mighty things to pass. O how do I long, dear Sir, to see bigotry and
party-zeal taken away, and all the LORD’s servants more knit together.
Pray, my due respects to all that are so kind as to enquire after me.
Exhort them to pray and give thanks for,

              Your unworthy friend, brother, and servant
                     in our dear LORD’s vineyard,

                                                             _G. W._

  ¹ Many of the letters of this date were written on ship-board
    during the passage, but dated when sent off from _Philadelphia_.


                             LETTER LXIX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

MAN appoints, but GOD disappoints. No doubt it was best, that I should
not see your answer to the bishop’s letter before I left _England_. I
hope it was wrote with the meekness and gentleness of CHRIST, and then
no doubt GOD will give his blessing. Oh, dear Sir, how is the glory
departed from _Israel_! In what dregs of time are we born? Boasting
of our orthodoxy and primitive purity, and yet alas! but ―――― is not
this enough, dear Sir, to excite our zeal even till it do eat us up?
Wherefore hath GOD called us by his free grace, and made a difference
between us and others, but that we should stand up in defence of his
injured honour? Your friend, Mr. ――――, has told me how plentifully you
once tasted of the good word of life, and felt the powers of the world
to come. Oh that the divine spark may again kindle in the heart till
it become a flame of fire! Nothing will so much enforce your arguments
as a life exactly conformable to the holy JESUS.――When with you last,
I thought you spoke too favourable of horse-races, and such things.
But what diversion ought a christian or a clergyman to know or speak
of, but that of doing good? Many who are right in their principles,
are worse than I could wish in their practice. Oh for a revival of
true and undefiled religion in all sects whatsoever! I long to see a
catholic spirit over-spread the world; may GOD vouchsafe to make me an
instrument of promoting it! Methinks, I care not what I do or suffer,
so that I may see my LORD’s kingdom come with power. But I know not
my own weakness, till I am tried. Dear Sir, pray for me, that I may
be found faithful in an hour of temptation. I expect to be tried to
the uttermost, and to hear, that many are become my enemies, who once
would, as it were, have plucked out their eyes for me. It is necessary
that such offences should come; otherwise, how can I know that I am,
what I desire to be, dear Sir,

         Your affectionate friend and true brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Brethren, and worthy fellow-labourers in CHRIST_,

THOUGH I know none of you in person, yet, from the time I heard
of your faith and love towards our dear LORD JESUS, I have been
acquainted with you in spirit, and have constantly mentioned you in my
poor prayers. The good pleasure of the LORD, I find, prospers in your
hands; and I pray GOD increase you more and more, both you and your
children. _Scotland_, like _England_, hath been so much settled upon
it’s lees for some time, that I fear our late days may properly be
called the midnight of the church. Blessed be GOD, the Father of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST, who hath sent forth many of his servants with this
cry, “Behold the bridegroom cometh.” Thousands obey the call, and are
trimming their spiritual lamps, in order to go forth to meet him. I
cannot but think a winnowing time will come after this in-gathering of
souls. O that we may suffer only as christians, and then the spirit of
CHRIST and of glory will rest upon us. In patience possess your souls,
and I will leave my cause to GOD. You, my reverend Brethren, I am
persuaded, are no otherwise minded; may we go on then in the power,
and under the guidance of the LORD of HOSTS. The eternal GOD will be
your perpetual refuge. He that employs, will protect; as your day is,
so shall your strength be. Let not our dear LORD’s lambs perish for
lack of knowledge. “Give ye, give ye them to eat,” methinks, is the
endearing, constraining command of the great Shepherd and Bishop of
souls. And O that a due obedience may be paid to it by me, your
unworthy brother. But I blush almost, when I stile myself your brother;
for I am a child, and all of you are fathers. Oh, strive together with
me in your prayers, that the divine strength may be still magnified
in my weakness. You will intreat the LORD to bless the orphan-house.
I have reason to think, GOD will bring great good out of it. Oh that
I may be prepared for future favours! Oh that pride and self-love may
thoroughly be subdued! Brethren, I beseech you by the mercies of GOD
in CHRIST JESUS, to pray for me, whilst winds and storms are blowing
over me. You are not forgotten by him, who, though the most unworthy
of his LORD’s servants, desires to subscribe himself,

            Your affectionate brother, and fellow-pilgrim
                    and labourer in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXXI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Friend_,

BECAUSE I will not forget you, I begin to write before we get on shore.
How is dear Mr. ――――’s heart? Has he yet recovered his first love? And
is that prophecy, “This child is set for the falling and rising again
of many in _Israel_,” as yet fulfilled in him. I cannot but think a
good work was once wrought upon your soul. I cannot but think, GOD
will yet fulfil his whole will in you. But let not my dear friend
linger any longer. If there is mercy with GOD, let him be feared, not
disobeyed. If he has promised to heal our backslidings, and love us
freely, let his goodness lead us to repentance. Prosperity hath been a
snare to you; every day I see the excellency of that part of _Agur_’s,
prayer, “Give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
who is the LORD.” And that petition in our liturgy, “In all time of
our wealth, good LORD deliver us.” I always take particular notice of
it. I believe you will not be at all richer this year, than you was
the last.――For as riches increase, our wants increase with them.――I
write not this to have you desert your station, but to excite a holy
jealousy in your heart.――Oh, what would I give to see my dear friend,
as formerly, “Fervent in spirit, serving the LORD.” If GOD sends
me to _England_ again, I shall try my friends. However that be, I
am persuaded, that suffering for righteousness sake, is the best,
the greatest preferment in the church of CHRIST. But how does your
little――I would not willingly say, your great idol. Pray accept a
quarto bible for him. Oh, my friend, give him up to GOD, and do not
provoke him, by over-fondness and too great indulgence, to take him
from you. The little lambs on board improve bravely; they bear the
voyage best of all. They are as lusty as eagles: GOD has dealt most
gently with us. I hope I may say, the church in my house salute you
and your wife.――I do not forget her; may she never rest till she comes
into the glorious liberty of the children of GOD! It is a blessed
thing, my dear friend, to be the LORD’s freeman. My heart is full; I
repent I have not allowed more paper. My dear Sir, excuse and pray for

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Sister in CHRIST_,

WANT of time, not want of respect, has prevented my answering your
kind letters. I esteem you highly for CHRIST’s sake. I believe you
to be one whom GOD has chosen out of the world, and hath sealed to
the day of redemption. Nothing, therefore, shall pluck you out of
his hands. Was it not for this promise, my soul would be exceeding
sorrowful at the prospect of what I may undergo. The innumerable
temptations that attend a popular life, sometimes make me think it
would be best for me to withdraw. But then I consider, that He, who
delivered _Daniel_ out of the den of lions, and the three children out
of the fiery furnace, is able and willing to deliver me also out of
the fiery furnace of popularity and applause, and from the fury of
those, who, for preaching CHRIST, and him crucified, are my inveterate
enemies. In his strength therefore, and at his command, whenever his
providence shall call, I will venture out again. As yet my trials have
been nothing. Hereafter a winnowing time may come; then we shall see,
who is on the LORD’s side, and who dare to confess CHRIST before men.
None but those who wholly rely on the Redeemer’s righteousness, and
are truly born again of GOD. Oh pray, that I may be found faithful.
Satan hath been very busy with me since I saw you, but I trust the
LORD, by these inward trials, will purge me, that I may bring forth
more fruit. Cease not to pray, that this may be the happy case of,

                     Your servant in the gospel,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXIII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

YOU cannot well conceive how constantly you have been upon my heart,
since I saw you. I think there has been a sympathy between your heart
and mine. I have often pitied my dying friend, and as often prayed,
that he may leave a word for GOD. I say, prayed, for GOD alone can
remove the load.――I know too well what such temptations are, to think
they may be overcome by our own strength. But, my dear Friend, you
and I, weak as we are, can do all things through CHRIST strengthening
us.――Do you believe on the Son of GOD? All things are possible to him
that believeth. If the devil therefore continues his assaults, resist
him, stedfast in the faith. Resist him, my dear Friend, and he will
flee from you; rather suffer any thing, than be unequally yoked with
an unbeliever. If you cannot overcome where you are, absence, perhaps,
may cure you. Methinks, I would do and suffer any thing, rather than
dear Mr. ―――― should be led away.――My companions in travel have an
equal respect for you. We have often joined in prayer for you, when
eating your cake. May GOD reward you for that, and all your other kind
respects and favours conferred on, dear Mr. ――――,

                Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXIV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Madam_,

I Should think myself highly ungrateful, did I not take all
opportunities of acknowledging the many kindnesses I have received
at your hands. Your last presents have been exceeding serviceable
on board the ship, and every time we have tasted your bounty, I have
endeavoured to dart up a short ejaculation for our kind benefactress.
You cannot conceive, _dear Madam_, how loving the LORD has dealt
with us; he has given us all things richly to enjoy, and comforted
us on every side. Indeed sometimes he has been pleased to withdraw
from me, and to permit satan to send me a thorn in the flesh.――But
that was only to shew me my vileness, and to prepare me for further
manifestations of his goodness to my soul. Our voyage though long has
not been tedious or burdensome. My soul wants retirement.――I dread
coming out into the world again. I am confident, dear Madam, that
you will pray for me, that I may be kept unspotted from it. Oh what a
blessed Master do we serve! His rod as well as staff comforts the soul.
His corrections are all loving, and are only intended to make us truly
great. Though you seemed to doubt, yet I hope to see you once more
before you go hence. I cannot say I expect liberty long, if I speak
boldly the truth as I ought to speak.――Indeed there is no being a true
christian, and yet holding with the world, so much as some may imagine.
JESUS CHRIST calls us to simplicity. I have often thought, dear Madam,
that you did not see through the world enough. Numbers are accounted
christians, who have only a name to live. I pray GOD to open all our
eyes, that we may see every thing clearly. A time of persecution will
show who are _Israelites_ indeed, and who outside professors.――I hope,
Madam, that, when tried, you will come forth as gold purified seven
times in the fire. I only fear for, and suspect myself.――The LORD my
righteousness will uphold me. Dear Madam, GOD only knows with what
gratitude I desire to subscribe myself

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXXV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. ――――_,

WHEN last abroad, I could not write to you for want of knowing your
name. Blessed be GOD we have since been better acquainted, and I now
know your name and place of abode. May the GOD, whom I desire to serve,
richly reward you for receiving me into your house. You were one of
my most constant hearers; may you be my joy and crown of rejoicing
in the day of the LORD JESUS. I trust ere now, you have felt, that
the kingdom of GOD does not consist in word, but in power. I know that
Mrs. ―――― would have me deal plainly with her soul; therefore I shall
not scruple to tell her, how I have sometimes thought she was not yet
clearly enough convinced of sin, and of the perfect righteousness
wrought out for, and to be imputed to her, by the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
through faith in his blood.――Since I have been on shipboard, blessed
be GOD, his name has made my soul to smart, and caused me to see more
of my own wretchedness. Oh, Mrs. ――――, you know not, neither do I
myself know as yet, what a mystery of iniquity is hid even in a heart
timely renewed. I saw a little of it the other day; and had I not
known my Redeemer liveth, and that he ever liveth to make intercession
for me, I must have sunk into despair:

             _But there’s a voice of sovereign grace
                Sounds from the sacred word;
              Here ye despairing sinners come,
                And trust upon the LORD._

May GOD of his infinite mercy so work upon you, that, at at the last
day, you may be found having on the wedding-garment! Was I to study
to eternity, I could wish you nothing better. May the ever-blessed GOD
say Amen to it. I hope your little daughters are in good health. Dear
Mrs. ――――, exhort them to renounce the lust of the eye and the pride
of life, and to abstain from all appearance of evil. I have a sincere
concern for you and yours, and with all possible thanks for your kind
presents and affection, I subscribe myself

              Your sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXVI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. ――――_,

AS I do not forget to pray for, so I do not forget to write to you,
to make a proper acknowledgment of your and your husband’s love;
exhorting you to save yourselves from this untoward generation. Before
I left _London_, I perceived GOD was working upon your soul. I trust
the same GOD, since my departure, has carried it on, and that you are
convinced of the sin of unbelief. Oh dear Mrs. ――――, it is a difficult
thing to believe aright; it can only be given from above. I know
many of my acquaintance, who love to hear me talk and preach, and
who receive me gladly into their houses; but alas! I fear they are
self-righteous, and were never yet truly convinced of sin. They have
good desires, and therefore flatter themselves, that they are good
christians: But I fear many of them are only foolish virgins. I would
not have dear Mrs. ―――― or her husband of this number. If she hath
followed on to know the LORD, I am persuaded ere now, she is in some
measure brought out of herself, and taught of GOD to rely only on
JESUS CHRIST for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
If thus minded, your soul is at peace with GOD, itself, and the world.
If not, let her ask and it shall be given her, let her seek and she
shall find, let her knock and a door of mercy shall be opened unto
her.――All things are possible to him that believeth――Oh dear Mrs. ――――,
my heart is inlarged towards you; I long for your salvation: press on
and faint not. Whenever I come, I shall expect to suffer. But though
we die for CHRIST, oh let us pray that we may not deny him in any wise.
Nothing but the free almighty grace of GOD can uphold,

                    Your sincere friend in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXVII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and Dear Sir_,

I Think I may say of you, as the _Samaritans_ did upon another
occasion, I believe you to be a true lover of our dear LORD JESUS.
Not merely because my brother told me so, but because I have it under
his own hand. Your last kind letter has knit my heart most closely to
you. I love those that thunder out the word. The christian world is
in a deep sleep. Nothing but a loud voice can awaken them out of it. I
pray GOD to strengthen you more and more, and cause you to triumph in
every place. Though absent in body, I am present with you in spirit.
It would rejoice me to hear of your success in the LORD. In about a
twelvemonth I purpose, GOD willing, to return to _England_; who knows
but then I may see you face to face, and have some spiritual gift
imparted to my soul? I long to die to myself, and to be alive unto GOD.
Methinks I would be always upon the wing; but alas! I have a body of
sin, which at times makes me cry out, “who shall deliver me?” I thank
GOD, our LORD JESUS CHRIST will deliver. But I never expect intire
freedom, till I bow down my head, and give up the ghost. Every fresh
employ, I find brings with it fresh temptations. GOD always humbles
before he exalts me. Sometimes I speak and write freely, at other
times I am comparatively barren; one while on the mount, another while
overshadowed with a cloud; but blessed be GOD, at all times at peace
with him, and assured that my sins are forgiven. I want to leap my
seventy years; I long to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST. But I
must be made perfect by sufferings. I expect no other preferment. And
you no doubt will have your share. This is our comfort, if we suffer
we shall also reign with CHRIST; hasten on, O LORD, that blessed time,
when dear Mr. ―――― shall sit down at thy right hand, with all the
spirits of just men made perfect in heaven! where I trust a seat,
though of the lowest class, is prepared for

                  Your unworthy friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER LXXVIII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and Dear Sir_,

SINCE I saw you last, you cannot well tell with what pleasure I have
reflected on the uncommon power that frequently attended the word at
_Bexley_. It was to me a sign of GOD’s good will, both to ministers
and people. The former I was convinced of, before I left _England_.
The last sermon I heard you preach, gave me much satisfaction. I hope
ere now you are convinced of the latter also, and have seen some good
effects amongst your parishioners. However, this I am assured of, we
shall all in due time reap the fruit of our labours, if we faint not.
Let me therefore exhort you, by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS,
to continue unwearied in well doing. You have seen the afflictions of
GOD’s spiritual _Israel_. “Do and live,” is most they hear. But what
is this, but requiring them to make bricks without straw? Arise, arise,
then, my dear Mr. ――――; proclaim the LORD to be their righteousness.
The everlasting I AM now sends you forth: say not they will disbelieve
my report, for GOD seems to have given his people the hearing ear
and obedient heart. Fear not the face of man, for the LORD, if you go
out in his strength, shall be with you, whithersoever you go. I hope
my dear and honoured friend ere now hath prevented my exhortations.
Methinks I see him, with all boldness declaring the whole counsel of
GOD, and the attentive people receiving joyfully the gracious words,
which proceed out of his mouth. Go on, my dear brother, go on; may
the LORD bless you more and more, daily adding to the number of your
spiritual children. ―――― I thank you, from my soul, for all favours
conferred on me, and I pray you may always confess our LORD and
his disciples before men. My most sincere respects attend your
help-mate and true yoke-fellow. You are constantly upon my heart.
My next journal will acquaint you how lovingly GOD hath dealt with

                Your most unworthy friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXIX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._

AND how does my dear Mr. _H――――s_? Is he yet commenced a _field
preacher_? I am persuaded my dear friend is under the guidance of
GOD’s spirit, and therefore am convinced he will be directed for the
best. He desires to do his LORD’s will, and shall he not know it?
Undoubtedly he shall. Nay, ere now I trust GOD has pointed out his
way, and he has been upon many a mount stretching out his hands, and
inviting all that are weary and heavy laden to come to JESUS CHRIST.
Oh my dear brother, though you come after me, yet I pray GOD, you may
always be preferred before me. I trust I shall not envy, but rejoice
in my brother’s success. At present, I find I love him in the bowels
of JESUS CHRIST; I am frequently with you in spirit, and shall wait
with impatience till I hear of my dear brother’s progress in the
LORD. Alas! I fear I do not improve my retirement as I ought. GOD has
graciously pleased to conduct me in mercy. The tempter has been busy
with me, and I never before was more deeply wounded for sin. CHRIST’s
love will let nothing pluck us out of his hands. However, let us
constantly watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation. The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. In about a twelvemonth, GOD
willing, I think of returning to _England_. I should rejoice, if you
would come and supply my place at _Savannah_. If not, I must resign
the parsonage, and take upon me only the care of the orphans. I intend
bringing up two or three, that are with me, for the ministry: more,
no doubt, will shortly be added to their number. If you could come
and teach them the languages, for an hour or two in the day; we could
serve both the orphan-house and parsonage together. Great things I
trust will come out of _Georgia_. The LORD JESUS direct your spirit,
and if it be his will, send you as a help to, dear Sir,

             Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER LXXX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

THOUGH but little acquainted with you, yet I write this to assure you,
what a cordial respect I have for you. The love of GOD, which I trust,
through his free grace, is shed abroad in both our hearts, constrains
me to love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. I remember you in my
unworthy prayers, and am persuaded I am not forgotten in your’s. No
one more needs them, whether considered as a private christian, or a
public minister; thousands are waiting for my halting; and I know so
much of the corruption of my own heart, that was GOD to leave me to
myself but one moment, I should with oaths and curses deny my master.
As for my final perseverance, I bless GOD, I have not the least doubt
thereof. The gifts and callings of GOD are without repentance. Whom
he loves, I am persuaded, he loves to the end. But then I fear, lest
being puffed up with abundance of success, I should provoke the LORD
to let me fall into some heinous sin, and thereby give his adversaries
reason to rejoice. A public life is attended with innumerable snares;
and a sense of my unworthiness and unfitness so weighs me down, that I
have often thought it would be best for me to retire. But I know these
are all suggestions of the enemy. Why should I distrust omnipotence?
Having had a legion of devils cast out of my heart by the power of
CHRIST, why should I not tell what he hath done for my soul, for
the encouragement of others. By the help of GOD, I will speak; and
the more satan bids me to hold my peace, the more earnestly will I
proclaim to believing saints, that JESUS the son of _David_ will have
mercy on them; nay, I do not despair of publishing these glad tidings
even at _Wethersfield_. In a little above a twelvemonth, GOD willing,
I intend returning. But ere that time comes, I trust my dear LORD
will purge me, that I may bring forth more fruit.――Satan has not been
wanting to sift me as wheat; but my friend, the friend of all, even
JESUS, has prayed for me, and as yet my faith hath not failed. Oh
had I a thousand lives, my dear LORD JESUS should have them all! For
he is worthy, he hath plucked me as a brand out of the burning, and
is continually comforting me on every side――Read, read, dear Sir, the
account I have sent over to be published of what GOD hath done for
me in the days of my youth, and it will afford more thanksgiving and
praise.――Pray in the behalf of, Sir,

         Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

I Love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST, as a proof of it, I send
this. I heartily wish I could correspond with you oftener. Your
advice would always be seasonable to me; because you have been a long
time in the school of CHRIST. I am but just now entering the list,
and frequently tremble at the consideration of what I am to do and
suffer.――But when I consider it is for JESUS CHRIST, who has called
me by his free grace into his marvellous light, and has promised to be
with us always, even unto the end of the world, a divine fire kindles
in my heart, and I long to call the lingring battle on. Satan hath
been busy with me since I saw you, especially since my retirement
on ship-board. I have often thought of the folly of those, who go
out of the world to avoid temptation. Satan now buffets me more
than when confined in a ship. I receive this as a great mercy at the
hands of the LORD to keep me in action, and to prepare me for greater
tokens of his love. Before I am exalted, I am always humbled by some
inward trials. They are the most soul-grieving, but they are the most
soul-improving conflicts. My dear friend, I can say from my heart,
“I am the chief of sinners:” I feel myself so wretched and miserable,
so blind and naked in myself, that satan would tempt me to write to
no one. But the LORD hath rebuked him, and after a long tedious hour
of temptation, fills my soul as it were with marrow and fatness, and
maketh my pen the pen of a ready writer. Oh that my mouth was filled
with his praise! As yet, blessed be GOD, in my darkest hours my
evidences have not been in the least clouded. I have been assured my
LORD hath forgiven all my iniquities, transgressions and sins, but I
cannot forgive myself. Oh that I should ever offend against such dying
love! Pray for me, my dear brother, pray for me, that I may never by
pride or sloth tempt the blessed spirit to depart from me. I fear not
falling finally; for GOD I believe chose me in CHRIST before ever the
earth and the world were made, as a vessel of his saving mercy; but I
fear I shall provoke him to let me fall foully, and then how will the
_Philistines_ rejoice? This consideration sometimes makes me to wish
that the LORD would cut off my strength in my journey, and shorten my
days. But wherefore do I fear? Ah me of little faith! You see, my dear
friend, how freely I have unbosomed my heart to you. I cannot call you
my friend, and yet hide from you GOD’s dealings with my soul. Salute
all that love our LORD JESUS in sincerity, and beseech them to pray
for your sincere friend, but the most unprofitable of his dear LORD’s
servants,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and Dear Sir_,

YOUR kind letters, and kinder visit, have made me frequently to long
for a more close correspondence with you. I find my heart drawn out in
love towards you, and had GOD so ordered it, could have wished to have
perused what you have written in my defence. I pray GOD to confer on
you that reward, which he has promised to give those who confess him
before men. If the gospel continues to run and have such free course,
I must suffer, as well as preach for my dear LORD JESUS. Oh lift up
your hands, _dear Sir_, in the congregations of the faithful, that
I may willingly, (if need be) resist even unto blood; but not with
carnal weapons. Taking the sword out of the hand of GOD’s spirit,
I fear has more than once stopped the progress of the gospel. The
_Quakers_, though wrong in their principles, yet I think have left us
an example of patient suffering, and did more by their bold, unanimous
and persevering testimonies, than if they had taken up all the arms
in the kingdom. In this respect I hope I shall follow them as they
did CHRIST, and though I die for him, yet take up no carnal weapon
in defence of him in any wise. The doctrines of our election, and
free justification in CHRIST JESUS, are daily more and more pressed
upon my heart. They fill my soul with a holy fire, and afford me great
confidence in GOD my Saviour. Surely I am safe, because put into his
almighty arms. Though I may fall, yet I shall not utterly be cast away.
The spirit of the LORD JESUS will hold, and uphold me. That GOD may
every day enrich you more and more with the anointings of this spirit,
is the hearty prayer of, Reverend and dear Sir,

      Your most obliged friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER LXXXIII.

                      _To the brethren in ――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._

TWICE did I purpose to come and see you at ――――, but was prevented
by that all-wise providence, which ordereth all things for the best:
however, though absent, I am not unmindful of you. As a testimony
thereof I send you this. And oh that you may be filled with an holy
fire, and such an ardent zeal for GOD as even to eat you up! Look
round, look round, my brethren, and in imitation of your common LORD,
weep over the desolations of the university wherein you live. Alas!
how is that once faithful city become an harlot! Have pity upon her,
ye that are friends, and whatever treatment you may meet with from an
ungrateful world, endeavour at least to rescue some of her sons out
of that blindness, ignorance, bigotry and formality, into which she is
unhappily fallen. Arise, ye sons of the prophets; shine forth, ye who
are appointed to be the lights of the world. The rulers of this world
will endeavour to put you under bushels; but if your light is of GOD’s
kindling, all the devils in hell shall not be able to extinguish it.
Be not therefore, my brethren, weary of well doing. Have you true
faith? keep it not to yourselves; be willing, as occasion offers,
freely to communicate it to others. How will you be apt to teach
hereafter, unless you begin to teach now? None but those, who are of a
different spirit from that meek man _Moses_, will be offended at you.
All GOD’s people will wish you GOD speed. I am sure I do with all my
heart. And I pray GOD to sanctify your whole spirits, souls and bodies,
and make you vessels meet for our common Master’s use! for none but
those who have felt the spirit themselves, can freely or feelingly
speak of him to others. My dear brethren, forget not to pray for,

    Your affectionate, though weak brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXIV.

                              _To ――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Brethren in CHRIST_,

THE cordial love I bear you, will not suffer me to neglect writing
to you: as GOD has been pleased to bless my ministry to your souls,
so I think it my duty to watch over you for good, and assure you,
constantly you are all upon my heart. Your last letter gave me great
pleasure; but it was too full of acknowledgments, which I by no means
deserve. To him alone, from whom every good and perfect gift cometh,
be all the thanks and glory; I heartily pray GOD, that you may be
burning and shining lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. Though you are not of the church of _England_, yet
if you are persuaded in your own minds of the truth of the way
wherein you now walk, I leave it. However, whether _Conformists_, or
_Nonconformists_, our main concern should be, to be assured that we
are called and taught of GOD; for none but such are fit to minister
in holy things. Indeed, my dear brethren, it rejoiced me much to see
such dawnings of grace in your souls; only I thought most of you were
bowed down too much with a servile fear of man: but as the love of
the Creator increases, the fear of the creature will daily decrease
in your hearts. _Nicodemus_, who came at first by night to our LORD,
afterwards dared to own him before the whole council in open day. I
pray GOD make you all thus minded. For unless your hearts are free
from worldly hopes and worldly fears, you never will speak boldly, as
you ought to speak. The good old _Puritans_, I believe, never preached
better, than when in danger of being taken to prison as soon as they
had finished their sermon. And however the church may be at peace now,
yet I am persuaded, unless you go forth with the same temper, you will
never preach with the same demonstration of the spirit, and of power.
Study therefore, my brethren, I beseech you by the mercies of GOD in
CHRIST JESUS, study your hearts as well as books――ask yourselves again
and again, whether you would preach for CHRIST, if you were sure to
lay down your lives for so doing? If you fear the displeasure of a man
for doing your duty now, assure yourselves you are not yet thus minded.
But enough of this. I love to hope well of you all. I trust, as you
are enlightened with some degree of knowledge in the mysteries of
godliness, you will henceforth determine not to know any thing but
JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. This is, and this, the LORD being my
helper, shall be the only study of, my dear brethren,

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and Dear Sir_,

WHY so long silent during my stay in _England_? why did you not write
me a letter of reproof, and smite me friendly for what you thought
amiss in the discourse between me and a friend at _Bristol_? I should
have taken it kindly at your hands. When I am unwilling to be told of
my faults, dear Sir, correspond with me no more. If I know any thing
of this treacherous heart of mine, I love those most, who are most
faithful to me in this respect: henceforward, dear Sir, I beseech you
by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, spare me not. I am blind, I am
full of self-pride, and self-love, and yet know it not. Blessed be GOD,
who during my retirement has been pleased to let me see something of
my own vileness. I trust he will never leave nor forsake me, till I
know myself even as I am known. I need not fear the sight of sin, when
I have a perfect everlasting righteousness wrought out for me by that
GOD-man CHRIST JESUS. The riches of his free grace, cause me daily
to triumph over all the temptations of the wicked one, who is very
vigilant, and seeks all occasions to disturb me. The LORD CHRIST is my
helper, and the lifter up of my head. It is good for me to be tempted.
By inward trials I trust my divine master will prepare me for his
future mercies. I am persuaded I shall yet see great things, and be
called to suffer for his name sake. Through much tribulation, I must
enter into glory. Lift up your hands, dear Sir, when praying at the
sanctuary, in my behalf; intreat the same favour of the elect lady. As
I am enabled, it shall be returned; and, GOD willing, when I come next
to _England_, you may expect a visit from, dear and reverend Sir,

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXVI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My Rev. and very dear Brother_,

EVER ♦since I was favoured with your last most endearing letter,
you have been upon my heart more and more. As I wish all the LORD’s
servants were prophets, so it gives me uncommon pleasure, when the
LORD raises up one of our own church. Believe me, dear Sir, when I
look upon her desolations, I can scarce forbear weeping over her.
But blessed be GOD, who has been pleas’d to visit her in this our
day. Henceforward, I trust she will be a joyful mother of spiritual
children. Many of late, under GOD, have been begotten by some of her
sons through the gospel, amongst whom I may reckon ――――: He has been
I believe, and trust will still be the ghostly father of many souls.
May he increase with all the increase of GOD, and appear before
his redeemer at the last day, saying, “Behold me, O LORD, and the
children which thou hast given me.” Oh dear Sir, words cannot express
how affectionately I desire to esteem and love you. None but the
all-seeing GOD knows how earnestly I pray and desire to labour for the
prosperity of _Jerusalem_. Had we a thousand hands and tongues, there
is employment enough for them all: people are every where ready to
perish for lack of knowledge. As the LORD has been pleased to reveal
his dear Son in us, Oh let us stir up that gift of GOD, and with all
boldness preach him to others. Freely we have received, freely let
us give; what CHRIST tells us by his spirit in our closets, that let
us proclaim on the house top. He who sends, will protect us. All the
devils in hell shall not hurt us, till we have finished our testimony.
And then, if we should seal it with imprisonment or death, well will
it be with us, and happy shall we be evermore! But the proof of our
sincerity, will be when we come to the trial. I fear for no one so
much as myself. Dear Sir, pray that you never may have reason to be
ashamed of the

              Most unprofitable of our LORD’s servants,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ removed duplicate word ‘since’


                           LETTER LXXXVII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

I Hope dear brother ―――― hath satisfied you about the queries in your
last. I trust you are not angry with me for being so long silent.
Excess of business was the cause. I write you this, my dear brother,
to assure you I have not forgotten you. No, you are upon my heart; I
pray for your prosperity both in body and soul, and hope ere we die to
take another tour with you round _Wales_. GOD has dealt most lovingly
with us on ship-board. We had very fair weather most part of our way.
Both the good and bad spirit have been with us in the ship. The one to
tempt and terrify, the other to support and comfort. I need not tell
you which has prevailed. Who shall stand before the spirit of JESUS
CHRIST? I have had great intimations from above concerning _Georgia_.
Who knows but we may have a college of pious youths at Savannah? I
do not despair thereof. _Professor Franks_’s undertaking in Germany
has been much pressed upon my heart. I really believe that my present
undertaking will succeed. My dear brother, call down a blessing by
your prayers. The LORD will hear those who put their trust in his
mercy through CHRIST. You see, you know, how many would rejoice
at, and do wait for my halting. Beseech the LORD that they may be
disappointed of their hope; intreat the people of _Wales_ to join
with you. I love them most tenderly. I hope, at my return, to see
them grown in grace. I pray GOD so to improve my retirement, that
my progress may be made known unto them all. Salute them most
affectionately in my name, and exhort them to continue instant in
prayer and thanksgivings for, dear and honoured Sir,

       Your fellow pilgrim and labourer in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER LXXXVIII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
 _My dear brother in CHRIST_,

AS there has been joy in heaven at your conversion, so I can assure
you there has been on earth. I, and my friends, have not failed to
give thanks, that you our brother was dead, but is alive again; was
lost, but is found. Oh blessed be GOD for calling you at the eleventh
hour. Doth not this display the riches of his free grace; and ought
it not to fill you with his praise all the day long? I wonder not that
you are already become a fool for CHRIST’s sake. All that will live
godly in him must suffer persecution. But fear not man. The LORD OF
HOSTS shall be with you; the strength of that GOD who hath called
you shall be your refuge. As you have not long to live in this world,
Satan, no doubt, will rage most horribly against you. Watch and pray
that you enter not into temptation. Your case, GOD willing, I intend
to publish in my next journal. It is good to keep close the secrets of
a king, but it is honourable to speak of the works of the LORD. That
GOD may carry on and finish the good work begun in your soul, is the
hearty prayer of

           Your affectionate friend and brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER LXXXIX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Miss B._,

THOUGH, when I came first to London, I thought you had not made the
progress which might be expected in the twelve months, for want of
company; yet your last behaviour gave me reason to think that you was
yet alive to GOD. Oh, dear Miss B――――, do not slumber or sleep, but
be always trimming your spiritual lamp, knowing you are shortly to
meet the Bridegroom. Study to shew the simplicity of JESUS CHRIST, and
strive to imitate those holy matrons, who not only administred to our
LORD of their substance, but also followed him to the accursed tree.
Love, love to JESUS, casts out fear. No doubt they were reproached
for his name sake, and accounted mad women; but they had a faith which
enabled them at that time to overcome the world, and by which they
climbed up to heaven. May dear _Miss B――――_ be thus minded! And may
I see her at the last day amongst the wise virgins! Cultivating an
acquaintance with _Miss D――――_, and the _Miss C――――_, will be a step
towards bringing you thither.

           Dear _Miss B――――_, I am your friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER XC.

                           _To my Brother._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._

THOUGH I have wrote now for some years to my dear brother, and have
availed nothing, yet I cannot cease striving with him; who knows but
at length the Almighty may remove the scales from his eyes, and enable
him to see the want of a Redeemer. Indeed, my dear brother, you do not
see it yet, because you do not feel it; your moral honesty and good
nature deceives you. You think you are rich, and increased in goods,
and do not consider that you are poor and miserable, blind and naked.
You are self-righteous, and do not rely on the righteousness of the
God-Man, CHRIST JESUS, for salvation. What would I give was my dear
brother convinced of this? For, till he is convinced, he is miserable,
and does not know it. I pray GOD to open your eyes with a sense of
his love. Send me a line to _Georgia_. GOD has sent us a comfortable
passage. In about a twelvemonth I expect to return. Be not surprised
if you hear of my being more cast out. We must suffer, as well as do,
for CHRIST. If you are one of his you will rejoice

                      Your affectionate brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XCI.

                          _To Madam M――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._

I Cannot think of the repeated assistances you gave me by the loan of
your coach, and at the same time forbear sending you a line of thanks.
But what is of greater concern, I think it my duty to write to you
about a more important affair; I mean the salvation of your precious
and immortal soul. GOD was pleased to incline your heart, Madam, to
hear and receive the word with joy. Neither the cares of the world,
nor the deceitfulness of riches, I trust have been permitted to choak,
and hinder the growth of it in your soul. Indeed, Madam, you cannot
be too watchful. It is a blessed, and careful thing, to be a true
Christian. The first step to it is a broken heart, a heart melted down
with a sense of sin, and flying to JESUS CHRIST for righteousness,
sanctification and eternal redemption. Thousands indeed place
christianity in good desires, and the having good desires; but this
and much more a person may have, and yet miscarry at last. Pure and
undefiled religion consists in a lively faith in JESUS CHRIST, as the
only mediator between GOD and man. A faith that changes and renews the
whole soul, takes it entirely off the world, and fixes it wholly upon
GOD. This, Madam, is the faith that you have so often heard me preach,
and of which I pray GOD you may be a partaker. Though you have it not
yet, you need not despair; GOD will give it to all who sincerely ask
of him. It is true, Madam, that not many mighty are called; but it is
not your riches shall keep you from heaven if you truly believe on the
LORD JESUS. Faith in him will enable you to overcome the world, and
cause you even to triumph over the lust of the eye and the pride of
life. Faith will set you above the fear of man, and enable you to
rejoice in being accounted a fool for CHRIST’s sake. That GOD may
impart this faith to your own, and little master’s soul, is the hearty
prayer of, Madam,

                     Your obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XCII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear brother H._,

I Congratulate you on your success at _Monmouth_. GOD has yet further
work for you to do, ere you are called before rulers and governors,
for his name sake. By divine permission, in about a twelve-month,
I hope to make a second use of your field pulpits. Our principles
agree, as face answers to face in the water. Since I saw you, GOD
has been pleased to enlighten me more in that comfortable doctrine of
_Election_, &c. At my return, I hope to be more explicit than I have
been. GOD forbid, my dear brother, that we should shun to declare the
whole counsel of GOD. The people of _Wales_ are much upon my heart.
I long to hear how the Gospel flourishes among you. How prospers your
inward man? Being always doing, no doubt you grow in grace. May you
increase with all the increase of GOD! You will see my letters to _Mr.
Jones_, &c. As fast as I can, the rest of our Welch friends shall hear
from me. Oh that I may never forget their works of faith and labours
of love! Salute them most affectionately in my name; and exhort them,
my dear brother, to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered
to the saints. Put them in mind of the freeness and eternity of GOD’s
electing love, and be instant with them, to lay hold on the perfect
righteousness of JESUS CHRIST by faith. Talk to them, oh talk to
them, even till midnight, of the riches of his all-sufficient grace.
Tell them, oh tell them, what he has done for their souls, and how
earnestly he is now interceding for them in heaven. Shew them in the
map of the word, the kingdoms of the upper world, and the transcendent
glories of them; and assure them all shall be theirs, if they believe
on JESUS CHRIST with their whole hearts. Press them to believe on him
immediately. Intersperse prayers with your exhortations, and thereby
call down fire from heaven, even the fire of the Holy Ghost,

                  _To soften, sweeten and refine,
                   And melt them into love._

Speak every time, my dear brother, as if it was your last; weep out,
if possible, every argument, and as it were compel them to cry, Behold
how he loveth us. Remember me, Remember me in your prayers, as being
ever, ever

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XCIII.

                       _To Mr. and Mrs. D――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Friends_,

WHEN I consider how constantly you attended my ministry, how gladly
you received me into your house, and how affectionately you took your
last farewell; methinks gratitude obliges me to send you a line. It
hath often given me pleasure to see in what harmony you seem to live,
and how you walked to hear the word of GOD as friends. Surely, thought
I, these are a happy pair. These I trust are help-meets for each other.
Oh that you may go on and prosper, and be plentifully rewarded for the
favours shewn to me, the most unprofitable of our LORD’s servants: he
will not forget your works of faith and labours of love. Whenever you
attend his word preached, I hope he will send you replenished away.
Oh that all knew what it is to believe in JESUS! How soon would they
renounce the world, take up their cross and follow him! LORD evermore
give us all this faith, even a faith working by love; a faith that
will enable us to overcome the world, and cause us to shake off all
fear of man. Pray give my due respects to your friend and his wife,
who used to dine with us. I pray GOD sanctify you all in spirit, soul
and body, and cause you to sit down on his right hand with

               Your affectionate, though most unworthy,
                    Friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XCIV.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. P――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend Sir_,

YOU may justly censure me as unkind for not answering your kind letter.
I can only plead by way of excuse an hurry of business, and my sudden
departure from _England_. At my return, GOD willing, I purpose to
see _Newbury_, and there to preach the Gospel of the Prince of Peace.
Perhaps my enemies may have so much power given them from above, as
to confine my body: but if I am bound, the word of the LORD will not
be bound. GOD will speak, and great shall be the company of preachers.
It often rejoices me to think what a prospect we have once again of
hearing the truth preached as it is in JESUS. I hope we shall catch
fire from each other, and that there will be an holy emulation amongst
us, who shall most debase man and exalt the LORD JESUS. Nothing
but the doctrines of the Reformation can do this. All others leave
freewill in man, and make him, in part at least, a Saviour to himself.
My soul come not near the secret of those who teach such things, mine
honour be not thou united to them. I know CHRIST is all in all. Man is
nothing: he hath a free will to go to hell, but none to go ♦to heaven,
till GOD worketh in him to will and to do after his good pleasure.
It is GOD must prevent, GOD must accompany, GOD must follow with his
grace, or JESUS CHRIST will bleed in vain. That GOD may continue his
blessing to us both, is the hearty prayer of, reverend and dear Sir,

                  Your obliged brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ insert omitted word ‘to’


                             LETTER XCV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. ――――_,

WAS not my heart with your heart, when we rode by the way and talked
to each other concerning the Scriptures? I thought our souls tallied
together, and that we had both drank of the same spirit. I have often,
since that time, admired the grace of GOD in you, and even now feel
my soul, whilst I am writing, intimately united with yours. What is
all this, but the effect and fruit of GOD’s everlasting love through
CHRIST our LORD? What is it, but an instance of the sovereign will and
good pleasure of GOD, who will have mercy on whom he will have mercy?
Oh how doth the free, the distinguishing grace of GOD excite the love
of those, who are made partakers of it! What was there in you and in
me, dear _Mr. O――――_, that should move GOD to chuse us before others?
Was there any fitness foreseen in us, except a fitness for damnation?
I believe not. No, GOD chose us from eternity, he called us in time,
and I am persuaded will keep us from falling finally, till time
shall be no more. Consider the Gospel in this view, and it appears a
consistent scheme, though directly contrary to the natural man; and
nothing convinces me more of the truth of these doctrines, than the
enmity that is in the heart of carnal minds against them. However,
the power of GOD is able to pull down every thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Henceforward I hope
I shall speak boldly and plainly as I ought to speak, and not fail to
declare the whole counsel of GOD. I pray daily, that I may know his
will more perfectly, not only that I may do it myself, but that I may
teach it to others. If I die for it, I cannot but speak the things
which I know. Oh my dear friends, lift up your hands for me in the
sanctuary. The prayers of the faithful, GOD will hear. Entreat the
same favour of your brother. I love you both in the bowels of JESUS
CHRIST, and remember you often when I go in and out before the LORD:
He has been with us in the ship. His rod has corrected, his staff has
comforted us; both his rod and staff have edified and strengthened
our souls. In a year’s time I hope to see _England_. My love to all
friends, and beseech them to pray that I may be prepared for whatever
awaits

        Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XCVI.

                           _To Mrs. Ann D._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Sister in CHRIST_,

I Owe you several letters, I will pay you one now; have patience
with me and I will pay you all. If any one ought to long to enjoy the
communion of saints hereafter, I ought in a particular manner. GOD
has highly favoured me in the acquaintance of numbers of his dearest
children. I cannot see some, and to but few of them can I write, on
account of other business. Hasten, O LORD, that blessed time, when we
shall all sit down to eat bread in thy kingdom!――My dear Sister, pray
that I may patiently wait till my change shall come. I want to leap
my seventy years. I long to be dissolved to be with CHRIST. Sometimes
it arises from a fear of falling, knowing what a body of sin I carry
about me. Sometimes, from a prospect of future labours and sufferings,
I am out of humour, and wish for death as _Elijah_ did: At others,
I am tempted, and then I long to be freed from temptations. But it
is not thus always: There are times when my soul hath such foretastes
of GOD, that I long more eagerly to be with him; and the frequent
prospect of the happiness which the spirits of just men made perfect
now enjoy, often carries me as it were into another world. Many such
sweet meditations hath my soul been favoured with; but in the midst
of all, I have felt, and do feel, that I am the chief of sinners.
A mystery of iniquity that lay in my heart undiscovered, has been
opened to my view, since my retirement in the ship. May he enlighten
me more and more, to know and feel the mystery of his electing,
soul-transforming love. Nothing like that, to support us under present,
and all the various future trials which await us. But the LORD has
apprehended us, and will not let us go. Men and devils may do their
worst; our JESUS will suffer nothing to pluck us out of his Almighty
hands; for he has loved us with an everlasting love, and therefore his
right-hand shall uphold us. By his assistance, we shall hold out to
the end. By his grace, I, you, and all his chosen ones shall finally
be saved. Then, my dear Sister, shall we converse, not with ink and
paper, but face to face. Then, but not till then, shall we fully
know what a legion of devils JESUS CHRIST hath cast out of our souls,
and how, after all our strivings against, and quenching many of the
motions of his spirit, he at last brought us to glory. Cease not to
pray for

                   Your unworthy brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XCVII.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. R._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Brother R._,

BEFORE I left _England_, I heard of your progress in _Leicestershire_
and _Nottingham_. I then rejoiced, yea, and I do now rejoice that
GOD hath sent you forth into his vineyard. I wish you all imaginable
success with my whole heart. The next news I hear from _England_, I
suppose, will inform me of your suffering, as well as preaching for
CHRIST. But I am persuaded a prospect of suffering does not damp, but
excite the zeal of my dear fellow-labourer. He lives in a place where
honest _John Bunyan_ was a prisoner of the LORD for twelve years.
And oh, what sweet communion did he enjoy in _Bedford_ gaol! I really
believe a minister will learn more by one month’s confinement, than by
a year’s study. Press on then, my dear Brother, press on and faint not;
speak till you can speak no more. Wait upon the LORD, and you shall
renew your strength. Though sometimes faint, yet still pursue. Up
and be doing, and the LORD be with you. See how the fields are white,
every where ready to harvest. See how our LORD’s sheep are scattered
abroad, having too, too few true shepherds; I beseech you, go on, and
point out to them the Redeemer’s good pastures. Say not, wherewithal
shall I feed them? The great shepherd shall furnish you with food
enough, and to spare. Give of your loaves, and you shall take up of
the fragments that remain. To him that hath, shall be given. Satan
no doubt will resist you; he will bid you, out of a false humility,
to hold your peace; but let my friend speak out boldly as he ought
to speak. The Holy Spirit will give him utterance, and apply the word
to the hearers. If prayers may water the good seed, you may depend on
mine. I remember the dear _Bedford_ people. O let them not forget

                  Your poor weak brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER XCVIII.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. T._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

BEFORE I saw, I loved you. Ever since our personal acquaintance, I
have often thought, what a noble instrument you might be of turning
many to righteousness, if your heart was entirely freed from the
world, and inflamed with the love of GOD. Your vivacity of spirit,
your warm imagination, the energy and strength of your endearing
manner of writing, together with your loving, tender disposition, if
once duly influenced by the spirit of GOD, could not fail of winning
souls to CHRIST. Come out therefore my brother, my friend; come out
from among your carnal connections, and “be thou separate,” saith the
LORD Almighty. Throw off a false politeness, study the simplicity of
JESUS CHRIST, and be despised for something. _O pity, pity the church
of_ England. See how too, too many of her sons are fallen from her
articles, and preach themselves, not CHRIST JESUS the LORD. My dear
friend, I could wish my head was waters, and my eyes fountains of
tears, that I might weep day and night before the LORD. O let us
beseech him to spirit up more of his faithful servants, to go out into
the highways and hedges, and compel poor sinners to come in. Oh that
dear Mr. _T._ may be one of them! How would the spirit of CHRIST and
of glory rest upon his soul! Arise, arise, my dear brother, and gird
up the loins of your mind. Arise, arise, and be not of the number of
those who only fleece their flocks. Lift up your voice like a trumpet,
and preach the truth as it is in JESUS. Dear Mr. _T._ forgive this
freedom. My heart is full. I long to have the pure scripture truths,
as delivered in our homilies and our articles, preached up universally.
This is all that is contended for, by

           Your most unworthy friend, brother, and servant
                       in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER XCIX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. D. W._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Love you, though I have been so ungrateful as not to write to you.
I love you in the bowels of our common Master whose name we bear, and
in whose glorious service we are both employed. Oh, dear Sir, what are
we that we should be so highly favoured! Why are we honoured? Why are
we called to the ministry, and others that are effectually called by
grace, yet advanced no higher than private christians? I can only cry
out, Oh the depth of GOD’s sovereign, electing, unmerited love. Even
so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight! Surely, dear Sir, the
love of CHRIST must constrain us to spend and be spent for the good of
souls. Never was the harvest greater; never were the labourers fewer.
If we do not now lift up our voices like trumpets, the very stones
would cry out against us. I could almost say, “the glory is departed
from _Israel_; the ark of the LORD is fallen into enemies hands.”
Oh let us endeavour, dear Sir, let us endeavour to bring it back, by
preaching and living the truth as it is in JESUS. The light that has
been given us, is not to be put under a bushel, but on a candlestick.
Satan, indeed, by blasts of persecution, will do all he can to put it
out. If our light be the light of CHRIST, those blasts will only cause
it to shine the brighter. You have happily, dear Sir, experienced this.
You, I believe, was both in CHRIST and in the ministry before me. I
præ, sequar, etsi non passibus equis. The devil and all his hosts will
set their battle in array against us. My LORD has given me a sling
and a stone; stripling as I am, I will go forth then in his strength,
make mention of his righteousness only, and by that lay prostrate the
strong _Goliahs_. By your prayers I trust to be sent to _Wales_ once
more. The simplicity of that people much delights me. What shall, what
can I do for them? My prayers they have, and whatever GOD shall enable
me to do, they may demand a share from, dear Sir,

           Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER C.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. H._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H._,

I Received no answer to my last, yet I must write to you again. The
many happy hours I spent with you when at _Oxon_, and the benefit I
have received from your instructions and example, are yet fresh upon
my memory. I long to have my dear friend come forth, and preach the
truth as it is in JESUS. Not a righteousness or inward holiness of
our own, whereby we may make ourselves meet, but a righteousness
of another, even the LORD our righteousness; upon the imputation
and apprehending of which by faith, we shall be made meet by his
Holy Spirit to live with, and to enjoy GOD. Dear Mr. _H._ it is an
excellent thing to be convinced of the freeness and riches of GOD’s
grace in CHRIST JESUS. It is sweet to know and preach, that CHRIST
justifies the ungodly, and that all truly good works are not so much
as partly the cause, but the _effect_ of our justification before
GOD. Till convinced of these truths, you must own free-will in man,
which is directly contrary to the holy scriptures, and the articles
of our church. Let me advise dear Mr. _H._ laying aside all prejudice,
to read and pray over Saint _Paul_’s epistles to the _Romans_ and
_Galatians_, and then let him tell me what he thinks of this doctrine.
Most of your old friends are now happily enlightened. GOD sets his
seal to such preaching in an extraordinary manner, and I am persuaded
the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail against it. Oh that
dear Mr. _H._ would also join with us! Oh that the LORD would open his
eyes to behold aright this part of the mystery of godliness! How would
it rejoice my heart! How would it comfort his own soul! He would then
no longer groan under the spirit of bondage: No, he would be brought
into the glorious liberty of the sons of GOD. I have wrote to dear
Mr. _O._ as well as to you, out of the simplicity of my heart.

                        Ever your’s in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER CI.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. K._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Brother K._,

I Long to hear how it is with you, and the church in your house. I
verily believe, though it is but a little flock, yet it will be our
heavenly Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. How happy is
it, when all are of one mind in a house; all agreed to entertain and
love the LORD JESUS. Their heaven is begun on earth. I pray GOD to
continue this blessing, and cause you daily to build up each other in
the knowledge of our LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST. He is a gracious
Master. Oh that I knew and loved him more! for he is altogether lovely.
Has he yet revealed himself in dear Mr. _K._’s heart? Is he assured
that his beloved is his? Is he brought into the glorious liberty of
the children of GOD? Is his mind free from scruples? Is he active? Is
he punctual? Is he strong in the LORD and in the power of his might?
Is the meekness of the lamb and the boldness of the lion blended in
his soul? Do his parishioners fear, yet love him? Is he a _Boanerges_,
and yet a _Barnabas_ in the church of GOD? Does he thunder against
obstinate sinners, and by displaying the riches of the promises,
comfort and build up the saints? Does he preach as the spirit gives
him utterance? Can he rely on the promise, “Lo I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world?”

Forgive this freedom, my dear brother. Love makes me thus impertinent.
I want to see you perfect, entire, lacking nothing. May GOD from day
to day supply what is still deficient in you and in me, till we come
to the fulness of the measure of the stature of CHRIST. He is faithful
that has promised. GOD has been gracious to me his servant. In about a
twelvemonth, I hope you will again see and rejoice with

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. F._,

THE LORD
reward you for all your works of faith and labours of love! They
shall be brought forth as so many evidences of your lively faith,
when we meet before our LORD in judgment. Does not the prospect of
that glorious day, often fill your soul with joy? It does mine. Why?
Because I know my Redeemer is to be my judge. Satan will accuse me; my
answer shall be, the LORD JESUS is my righteousness, how darest thou
to lay any thing to the charge of GOD’s Elect? I stand here not in my
own, but his robes; and though I deserve nothing as a debt, yet I know
he will give me a reward of grace, and recompence me for what he has
done in and by me, as though I had done it by my own power. Oh, dear
Mrs. _F._ how ought this to excite our zeal and love for the holy
JESUS. Why should we desire to plead for a righteousness of our own,
and cry up freewill, when we have an infinitely better righteousness
than our own to appear in, and a GOD that will crown us with eternal
glory for working in us both to will and to do after his good
pleasure? Happy are you and your’s, that have been taught these
glorious principles from your youth! Oh shew them forth more and
more by your works, and let the world see what it is to have a faith
working by love. Study, oh study, day by day, the simplicity of JESUS
CHRIST. Cast away every thing from you that savours of the lust of
the eye and pride of life. Be quick to hear, slow to speak, and let
your conversation always be seasoned with grace. Oh, dear Mrs. _F._ my
heart is enlarged towards you: My kind, my liberal hostess, what shall
I say or do to express my gratitude? I will, I do speak for you to the
king of kings. Though I am so great a sinner, he frequently admits
me into his privy chamber, and then I often sigh out, “O that my dear
_Hertford_ friends may live before thee.” This is all the return, dear
Mrs. _F._ that I can make. It is a prophet’s reward. Being my all,
though but two mites, I know you will accept it from

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CIII.

                             _To Mr. S._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Rejoice that GOD sent you so opportunely to _Monmouth_: I find every
day that two are better than one. GOD suffers his dear children to
fall into little miscarriages, that the eye may not say to the hand,
“I have no need of thee;” or again, the head to the foot, “I have no
need of thee.” We must be helps to each other on this side eternity.
Nothing gives me more comfort, next to the assurance of the eternal
continuance of GOD ’s love, than the pleasing reflection of having
so many christian friends to watch with my soul. I wish they would
smite me friendly, and reprove me oftner than they do; I would force
my proud heart to thank them. But I am amazed at your coming off
so triumphantly. Surely the devil is asleep, or rather that roaring
lion thinks to break out upon us with double fury hereafter. It often
shames me, when I read St. _Paul_’s account of his sufferings, to
think in how few particulars I can as yet sympathize with him. It as
often makes me long to be like him, and yet I fear how I shall act
when put to the trial. This, however, is my comfort, “JESUS CHRIST the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” He saw me from all eternity;
he gave me being; he called me in time; he has freely justified me
through faith in his blood; he has in part sanctified me by his spirit;
he will preserve me underneath his everlasting arms, till time shall
be no more. Oh the blessedness of these evangelical truths! These are
indeed gospel; they are glad tidings of great joy to all that have
ears to hear. These, bring the creature out of himself. These, make
him to hang upon the promises, and cause his obedience to flow from a
principle of love. They are meat indeed, and drink indeed unto my soul.
I am persuaded they are so likewise to you and dear Mrs. _S――――_. I
hope she is yet in the land of the living, and that she, yourself, and
your son, are daily preparing for eternity. I pray GOD sanctify your
whole spirits, souls, and bodies, and reward you for all kindnesses
shewn to, dear Sir,

             Your unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CIV.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. T._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

SHALL I promise and not perform? GOD forbid. When I saw you first at
_Cardiff_, it rejoiced my heart to hear what GOD had done for your
soul. You was then under some displeasure of your rector, if I mistake
not, for speaking the truth as it is in JESUS. Ere now, I hope dear
Mr. _T._ has had the honour of being quite thrust out. Rejoice, my
dear brother, and be exceeding glad, for thus was our LORD and SAVIOUR
served before you. Naked therefore follow a naked CHRIST. Freely you
have received, freely give. If you preach the gospel, you shall live
of the gospel. Though you go out without scrip or shoe, yet shall you
lack nothing. Rather than you shall want, ravens, those birds of prey,
shall be commanded to feed you. It is a blessed thing to live upon GOD.
Did ever any trust in him and was forsaken? No; search the generations
of old, climb up into heaven if you can, and all with one consent will
declare,

               _The LORD their pasture did prepare,
                And fed them with a shepherd’s care._

I, though hell-deserving, am a living witness of his good providence;
having nothing, I possess all things; he has fed me with the
kidneys of wheat, and commanded some one or another to sustain me
whithersoever I was sent on his errand. JESUS is the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever. If we go forth in the spirit of the first
apostles, we shall meet with apostolical success. And never was there
more occasion for the revival of such a primitive spirit. Alas, the
life, the power of religion is almost lost amongst us. Stir up then,
dear Sir, the gift of GOD, which is in you. Be instant in season and
out of season. Debase man and exalt JESUS. Self-righteousness overturn,
overturn. The people of _Wales_, the common people at least, will
receive you gladly. The LORD shall fight all battles for you here, and
reward you with a crown that never fadeth hereafter. If I have but the
lowest place in your affections, it will abundantly satisfy

                   Your most affectionate brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER CV.

                             _To Mr. M._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dearest Sir_,

EVER since you opened your heart so freely in the garden, you have
been much upon my heart. Though absent from, yet I have been present
with you. I am acquainted in some measure with the strugglings of a
soul just awakening into new life. I know too many have stifled their
convictions, and therefore am importunate on your behalf. I hope you
have taken my advice, and laid the ax to the root of the tree. Oh pray
for a new heart and a new spirit, and then all old things will subside
and give way of themselves. The strong man armed must go out when the
stronger than he, even the spirit of GOD, comes to take possession
of your soul. What therefore have you to do, dear Sir, but to throw
yourself as a poor sinner at the feet of the holy JESUS? You need
not doubt his holding out the golden sceptre to you. Whosoever cometh
to him by faith, he will in no-wise cast out. He calls, he draws
you: what is it for, but to assure you he will make you happy? Come
then, dear Sir, weary and heavy laden as you are, the LORD your
righteousness shall give you rest: He shall refresh you with a
multitude of peace, and cause you to rejoice in his salvation; there
is nothing too hard for the LORD CHRIST. He can draw your mind from
the creature, he can fix it upon himself; he can enable you to live
above the world, whilst you are in it; he can translate you to heaven,
when he has taken you away from earth. As the LORD JESUS can, so that
he may do all these things for your soul, is the hearty prayer of,
dear Sir,

                   Your sincere friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CVI.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. H._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dearest Sir_,

IT often concerned me, when in _London_, that I could not enjoy more
of your company. Your conversation was always seasoned with grace, and
such as became the gospel of CHRIST. Your great kindness, in publicly
praying for me, can never be sufficiently acknowledged. The thought
almost makes me to weep for joy. Surely the LORD will not let me
miscarry, since he has stirred up the choicest of his servants to
intercede in my behalf. The searcher of all hearts alone knows, what
agonies my poor soul has undergone since my retirement from the world.
The remembrance of my past sins has overwhelmed my soul, and caused
tears to be my meat day and night. Indeed I have mourned as one
mourneth for a first born: But I looked to him whom I have pierced.
I was enabled to see the freeness and riches of his grace, the
infiniteness and eternity of his love, and my soul received comfort.
Oh the excellency of the doctrine of election, and of the saints final
perseverance, to those who are truly sealed by the spirit of promise!
I am persuaded, till a man comes to believe and feel these important
truths, he cannot come out of himself; but when convinced of these,
and assured of the application of them to his own heart, he then walks
by faith indeed, not in himself, but in the Son of GOD, who died and
gave himself for him. Love, not fear, constrains him to obedience. The
promises of GOD are all Yea and Amen to his soul. Supported by these
convictions, in about a twelvemonth, GOD willing, I intend returning
to _England_, and to begin my testimony afresh. I trust I shall not
be ashamed to declare the whole counsel of GOD. Satan, no doubt, and
his emissaries, will endeavour to block up my way; but the saints of
GOD are praying for me on earth, and the holy JESUS is interceding
in heaven. Why should I not go forth and offer his everlasting and
perfect righteousness to all that shall be brought to believe on him?
Satan suggests even whilst I am writing, “How canst thou speak, seeing
thou art such a sinner?” But therefore will I speak, because I can say,
by happy experience, that JESUS CHRIST will have mercy on the chief of
sinners; for among such you may truly rank

       Your unworthy brother, and unprofitable fellow-labourer,
                     in our dear LORD’s vineyard,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CVII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. D._,

TEN thousand blessings light upon you and yours! The LORD reward you
ten thousand-fold for receiving me and my friends into your house. The
LORD shower down his heavenly manna, and feed you with the bread of
life for those comfortable meals we have had of your providing since
we came on board. We have not been slack to pray for you; my heart
is now full of a sense of your kindnesses. I know not when to begin
and when to leave off adoring the GOD and Father of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST for these and all other of his love-tokens: He is the father
of mercies, and the GOD of all comfort; he hath comforted me in all
my tribulation, and, I am assured, will still comfort me in whatsoever
I am to do or suffer for his name’s sake. You, dear Mrs. _D._ can
subscribe to this truth, that GOD is a God of all comfort. You have
been comforted on every side; you have been filled as it were with new
wine; you have tasted that the LORD is gracious, and yet the best wine
is and will be always reserved till the last. The LORD’s compassions
fail not; they are, they will be renewed to you every morning; and
though, through much tribulation, you, as well others, must enter into
glory, yet you will find GOD to be your comforter in all tribulation.
GOD has made you a joyful mother of christian children; remember the
mother in the _Maccabees_; and, if ever your children are called to
suffering, beg of GOD that you may stand by and encourage them to die
for CHRIST. Oh that would be a spectacle indeed! A spectacle worthy
of men and angels! I pray GOD to arm you with this mind, and then you
will find that GOD’s rod as well as his staff will comfort you; nay,
though you pass through the valley of the shadow of death, yet shall
the Holy Spirit refresh you; your heart shall stand fast, and be
stedfast in the LORD. Oh, my dear Madam, my heart is enlarged towards
you: I pray GOD to fill you with all his divine fulness, and make you
daily more and more meet to be an inheritor among the saints in light.
With much love I have wrote to dear Mr. _D._ Oh pray him not to be
angry with

              Your most affectionate friend and brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CVIII.

                             _To Mr. N._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Honoured Sir_,

BE not displeased at the contents of this; if I was not persuaded
that love to your soul, and my duty towards GOD, moved me to write,
I should be silent. When last at _Gloucester_, I heard you was
highly offended at my meetings in the fields, and at the same time
countenanced and encouraged the acting of plays in the _Boothall_.
This I thought highly unbecoming the character of a christian
magistrate, whose peculiar business it is to be a terror to evil doers,
and a praise to them that do well. This made me to speak against those
proceedings in my sermons. This is the occasion of my troubling you
with a letter. I cannot think I have delivered my soul, unless, with
all meekness and humility, I exhort you henceforward not to promote
or so much as any way countenance the stage-players. In our common
law they are stiled _sturdy beggars_. As a minister of the king, upon
that account it is your duty to put a stop to them: As a disciple
and minister of JESUS CHRIST, the king of kings, you are obliged,
_honoured Sir_, to exert your authority in suppressing them. It is
notorious that such meetings are the nurseries of debauchery; they
are the pest of our nation, and the bane of true christianity: To
be present at, or in the least to contribute towards their support,
is therefore a great sin; but to countenance them by our authority,
and let them act by our permission, what is this but becoming public
patrons for vice and immorality? It is not only sinning ourselves,
but it is taking pleasure in the sins of others. This the apostle
accounted the highest pitch of heathenish wickedness. Honoured Sir,
pray be not offended: These are not the words of a madman; no, they
are the words of truth and soberness, and words which our LORD will
approve of, when I stand with you before him in judgment. However men
may now put wrong names to things, and call that an innocent amusement,
which has no other tendency but to corrupt and debauch the heart, yet
then, Sir, we shall see all things clearly; then shall you know that
it was my duty to write as I have done, and will confess before men
and angels that you had an humble and affectionate warning given you,
by, honoured Sir,

                      Your very humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CIX.

                          _To Mr. Thomas P._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

THOUGH unknown to you in person, yet as you was pleased to think me
worthy of the care of your dear son, I think it my duty to acquaint
you of his welfare. I bless GOD that he came with me. He is diligent
and pious, and I trust will be a comfort to you in your declining
years: His mind seems settled and composed, and by reading and
following the bible, he is partaker of that peace which the world
cannot give. His dear and honoured father is much upon his heart.
How would it rejoice him to hear that you also was become a christian
indeed? Be not offended, dear Sir, at my expressing myself thus.
Assure yourself that christianity is something more than a name and
a bare outward profession. Morality of itself, dear Sir, will never
carry us to heaven; no, JESUS CHRIST is the way, the truth, and the
life. There is no being happy without a lively faith in him, wrought
in the heart by the blessed spirit of GOD. This faith transforms the
whole man, delivers him from the tyranny of his passions, and makes
him entirely a new creature. This is the reason why it is foolishness
to the world. Your son’s case in this respect was not singular. As
soon as ever we commence christians, we commence fools for CHRIST’s
sake. Every truly religious man must be deemed a madman. Forgive this
freedom, dear Sir; whilst I am writing, I find a love for your soul
arising in my heart, and methinks I could do any thing to bring your
grey hairs with comfort to the grave. Dear Sir, there is mercy with
CHRIST even for those who come in at the eleventh hour. CHRIST came to
save poor sinners; he came to save you, dear Sir, if you lay hold on
him by a living faith. That GOD may give you this faith, and thereby
make you happy in time and to eternity, is the hearty prayer of, dear
Sir,

                   Your obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER CX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. R. D._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Think I am a little in your debt; if not, love and gratitude call
upon me to send you a line. Man appoints, but GOD disappoints: His
providence called me away, before I could possibly see _Cornwall_.
In about a twelvemonth I purpose returning. Who knows but then I may
be enabled to perform my promise? The whole world is now my parish.
Wheresoever my master calls me, I am ready to go and preach his
everlasting gospel. My only grief is, that I can do no more for CHRIST;
for I am sure I ought to love and do much, having had so much forgiven;
not that I expect in the least to be justified by any or all the works
I either can or shall do: No, the LORD CHRIST is my righteousness, my
whole and perfect righteousness; but then I would shew forth my faith,
I would declare to the world the sincerity of my love, by always
abounding in the works of my LORD. Oh pray, dear Sir, that I may be
never weary in well-doing. The devil and his servants will shoot sore
at me that I may fall; but this consideration comforts and supports
me, “The LORD is my helper;” he has, he does, he will deliver. I am
persuaded you feel his gracious presence, and the influences of his
blessed spirit, whenever you go forth to speak in his name. May a
double portion of his spirit and precious anointings descend upon your
soul! May you be filled with all his fulness, and be enabled thereby
to turn many to righteousness here, and so shine as the firmament of
heaven for ever hereafter! Oh that a place at some saints feet may be
assigned to, dear Sir,

           Your weak though affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXI.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. B._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

YOU have been too kind, and I have been too ungrateful. Business would
not permit me to have so much private conversation with you as I ought.
Success I fear elated my mind. I did not behave towards you, and other
ministers of CHRIST, with that humility which became me. I freely
confess my fault; I own myself to be but a novice. Your charity, dear
Sir, will excite you to pray that I may not through pride fall into
the condemnation of the devil. Dear Sir, shall I come out into the
world again or not? Must I venture myself once more among fire-brands,
arrows, and death? Methinks I hear you reply, “Yes, if you come forth
in the strength of the LORD GOD, and make mention of his righteousness
only.” It is my desire so to do. I would have JESUS all in all. Like
a pure chrystal, I would transmit all the light he poureth upon me.
Oh pray, dear Sir, that I may be thus minded, and then, GOD willing,
in about a twelvemonth, I intend visiting the _Bristol_ brethren once
again. In the mean while, I hope the LORD will purge me, that I may
bring forth more fruit, and work upon me mightily in the inner-man,
for otherwise his blessings will prove curses to me. He has been
pleased to dig and dung round me, during my retirement; he has shewn
me something of the treachery of my own heart, and more and more
convinced me that I am the chief of sinners. Oh that my heart may
shew forth the eternity and sovereignty of his love! for never surely
was there a greater instance of it than myself. Happy are those that
are brought to an experimental knowledge of these mysteries of the
kingdom of GOD. Many of your charge have been, I believe; I pray GOD
to increase the number of your spiritual children more and more, and
to add daily to the church such as shall be saved. My cordial respects
attend your fellow-labourers, and all who are so kind as to ask for me;
as fast as opportunity permits, they may expect to hear from, reverend
Sir,

              Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. F._,

I Have now time to answer your last letter. It gave me much
satisfaction. I rejoice that you begin to know yourself. If possible,
satan will make us to think more highly of ourselves than we ought to
think. I can tell this by fatal experience. It is not sudden flashes
of joy, but having the humility of CHRIST JESUS, that must denominate
us christians. If we hate reproof, we are so far from being true
followers of the Lamb of GOD, that in the opinion of the wisest of
men, we are brutish. I love you and your dear husband in the bowels
of JESUS CHRIST. Under GOD, I begot you both through the gospel.
I therefore think it my bounden duty, from time to time, more
particularly to watch over your precious souls. Never account me your
enemy for speaking the truth. Tell me of my faults in your turn. I
will pray GOD to give me an hearing ear and an obedient heart. But
how do our brethren after their late dispersion? I heard they had in
part recovered themselves. Ere now, I trust, they have resumed their
courage, and stand stedfast as a wall of brass. If you were all to
be carried to prison the next moment, I think you should not decline
your christian fellowship and society meetings. My brethren, in this
respect, I beseech you to obey GOD rather than man. Happy are you, if
you patiently suffer in such a cause. Our LORD will stand by you; he
will fight all your battles, and make you more than conquerors through
his love. My heart would say more; but other letters must be wrote.
Salute all the brethren by name, and accept this as a token of your
not being forgotten by

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXIII.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. S._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THE favours received at _Hertford_, from you and your dear flock, are
not yet out of my mind: They were exceeding endearing, and deserve my
utmost acknowledgments. Had providence permitted, I should have paid
you another visit; but GOD’s thoughts are not as our thoughts: However,
in about a twelvemonth, by his leave, I hope to return amongst you
once more. Oh! that I may come in the blessing of the gospel of peace!
The doctrines I have already preached come with double evidence upon
my mind day by day. I am more and more convinced that they are the
truths of GOD; they agree with the written word, and the experience
of all the saints in all ages: Nothing more confirms me in the belief
of them, than the opposition that is made against them by natural men.
Election, free grace, free justification without any regard to works
foreseen, are such paradoxes to carnal minds, that they cannot away
with them. This is the wisdom of GOD, which is foolishness with man,
and which, the LORD being my helper, I intend to exalt and contend for
more and more; not with carnal weapons, that be far from me, but with
the sword of the spirit, the word of GOD: No sword like that. Dear Sir,
pray for me that I may rightly divide the word of truth, and give to
each his portion in due season. The LORD has been exceeding gracious
to me since I saw you last. Oh let your songs be of him, and praise
him for all his wonderful works. As I am enabled I remember you and
yours. Many, when I was with them, were mourning; ere now I hope they
are comforted. He is faithful who has promised, who also will do it.
If they hunger and thirst after CHRIST ’s righteousness, verily they
shall know that it is imputed to them. That you and your whole charge
may be filled with all the fulness of GOD, is the earnest prayer of,
dear Sir,

             Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXIV.

                         _To Mr. Wm. D――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My Dear Brother_,

YOUR last brought glad tidings. I endeavour to give thanks for you
with my whole heart. I trust GOD has enabled you to take the advice
you gave me, and that you have been kept from idolatry. Oh my dear
brother, let us watch and pray, that we may not be led into temptation.
The spirit is willing in both; but the flesh, mine in particular, is
exceeding weak. Blessed be GOD for sending me on ship-board. He has
given me to see something of that mystery of iniquity, which was in
my heart. I have loathed and abhorred my own self. Tears have been my
meat day and night; but glory be to GOD, who has lately assured me of
a victory through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. At present my heart is quite
free. You will see what I have written to those of your household.
I pray the LORD to send you and many more such labourers into his
harvest. I intend resigning the parsonage of _Savannah_. ♦The _Orphan
House_ I can take care of, supposing I should be kept at a distance;
besides, when I have resigned the parish, I shall be more at liberty
to take a tour round _America_, if GOD should ever call me to such a
work. However, I determine nothing, I wait on the LORD. I am persuaded
he will shew what is his will: though my heart is as yet perverse, in
time I hope to drink deeper into his spirit. How earnestly do I desire
to be dissolved, that I may be with CHRIST! Sometimes my weak body
gives me hopes, that I shall not be long in the flesh; but then, the
strength that is communicated to me, and the consideration, that I
have but just begun my testimony, fills me with fears, lest I should
live to be greyheaded. But I endeavour to resign myself wholly to GOD.
I desire his will may be done in me, by me, and upon me. If the LORD
preserves me from falling into sin, and dishonouring his holy name,
let him do what seemeth him good with

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘Th’ replaced with ‘The’


                             LETTER CXV.

                          _To Madam C――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Madam_,

TO be made good by the righteousness and spirit of JESUS CHRIST, is
a distinguishing blessing. To be made good, and yet to be great and
rich in this world’s goods, is still more extraordinary. Blessed be
GOD, who has thus highly favoured you. I trust he hath given you that
faith, which enables you to overcome the world, and emboldens you to
confess both our LORD and his servants, in the midst of a wicked and
adulterous generation. Once indeed I feared you had been offended.
Dear Mr. M―――― soon convinced me of my error. Yourself, Madam, amply
satisfied me before I left _London_, that you were not ashamed of the
gospel and ministers of CHRIST. May the LORD enable you more and more
to set your face as a flint, and entirely to live above the fear of
man. If the work goes on in _England_, a trying time will come. I
pray GOD, the same spirit may be found in all that profess the LORD
JESUS, as was in the primitive saints, confessors and martyrs. Further
opposition then will not hurt, but highly profit the church. The chaff
will be winnowed from the wheat, and they that are approved be made
manifest. As for my own part, I expect nothing but afflictions and
bonds. The spirit, as well as the doctrine of popery, prevails much
in many protestants hearts; they already breathe out threatnings. What
wonder, if when in their power, they should breathe out slaughters
also? This is my comfort, the doctrines I have taught are the
doctrines of scripture, the doctrines of our own and of other reformed
churches. If I suffer for preaching them, so be it. “Thou shalt answer
for me, O LORD my GOD!” I rejoice in the prospect of it, and beseech
thee, my dear redeemer, to strengthen me in a suffering hour. You,
dear Madam, and the rest of my friends, will not be wanting in praying
for

                  Your most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXVI.

                           _To Mr. D――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

GRATITUDE and love call upon me to write a letter of acknowledgment
for favours received when lately at ――――. The LORD remember them at
that day! You have confessed his servants before men, he has promised
to confess such, before his angels in heaven. The principles which
I maintain, are purely scriptural, and every way agreeable to the
church of _England_ articles. What I have been chiefly concerned about
is, lest any should rest in the bare speculative knowledge, and not
experience the power of them in their own hearts.――What avails it,
Sir, if I am a patron for the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST in behalf
of another, if at the same time I am self-righteous myself? I am
thus jealous, I trust with a godly jealousy, because I see so many
self-deceivers among my acquaintance. There is one in particular (whom
I love, and for whom I most heartily pray) who approves of my doctrine,
and hath heard it preached many years past, but I could never hear him
tell of his experiences, or of what GOD has done for his soul. He hath
excellent good desires and intentions, but I think he wants something
more: LORD, for thy infinite mercy’s sake, grant he may know himself
even as he is known! I need not tell Mr. _D――――_, who this dear friend
is――you are intimately acquainted with him, you love him as you do
your own heart; you are never out of his company. Oh, dear Sir, be not
angry. Methinks I hear you, by this time, making an application, and
saying, “Then I am the man.” True, dear Sir, I confess you are. But
love, love for your better part, your soul, your precious soul, this
love constrains me to use this freedom. You are more noble than to
take it ill at my hands; I could not bear even to suspect that you
deceived yourself, dear Sir, and not tell you such a suspicion was in
my heart. That GOD may powerfully convince you of self-righteousness,
and cloath you with the righteousness of his dear Son; that he may
fill you with his grace, and thereby fit you for, and at last
translate you to, his glory, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,

    Your most obliged and affectionate friend and humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXVII.

                           _To a Servant._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._

WHEN I was at Mr. ――――, I fear I did not ask you often enough what GOD
had done for your soul. I write this to beg your pardon. Want of time
was the cause. I believe CHRIST hath manifested himself to your soul.
Shew it, I entreat you, by labouring to adorn his gospel in all things.
A meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of GOD of great price. You are
happy in a place. I hope you know and are thankful for it. Take heed
that you serve with singleness of heart, as unto CHRIST. Go when you
are bid to go, come when you are bid to come; when commanded to do
this, do it with all your might. Bear with the perverseness of others.
Remember how silent _Mary_ was, when her sister _Martha_ peevishly
said, “LORD, carest thou not that my sister has left me to serve
alone?” My unfeigned love attends all the _Martha’s_ and _Mary’s_
of your acquaintance. I pray they may in all things walk as women
professing godliness. To hear of your progress in the gospel, would
much please

                   Your Sincere friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXVIII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. ――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

THE many favours I have received at your hands, are still deeply
impressed upon my heart; as I have often said, so I say again, I hope
they will never be forgotten by me so long as I live. But, reverend
Sir, I have observed some particulars in your principles and conduct,
which I must confess have given me much concern, and of which, from
love and gratitude, I think myself obliged to inform you. ―――― I
believe, dear Sir, you have often been inwardly offended at me,
because you suspected, I thought you to be no true christian. Your
suspicions were not groundless. I cannot yet think, that a thorough
work of conversion was ever wrought upon your soul. I fear you deny,
that “JESUS CHRIST is truly and properly GOD.” I infer this, from
your not reading the _Nicene Creed_, and your palliating that text I
once urged to prove it. “I and my Father are one.” I doubt also, your
owning “Original Sin.” This I gather from your wondering I should
touch on such a point, when I preached my sermon on justification by
JESUS CHRIST. Besides, the sad definition you once gave of religion
in a letter to your brother ――――; the stranger also which you seemed
to be to the “devil’s temptations,” when I conversed with you; and
your supposing, that conversion was to be wrought in the soul by
moral persuasion; all these put together, dear Sir, convince me, that
you were never yet truly and effectually born again of GOD. Besides,
_Reverend Sir_, does your going weekly to a club, where the company
play at cards, and sit up late at night, does this, dear Sir, agree
with your holy vocation, either as a christian or a minister? Be not
offended, Rev. Sir, at this plainness of speech. I have forborne a
long while; love and gratitude would not suffer me to forbear any
longer. I wish I had no occasion to write in this manner. I believe
you so ingenuous as not to be angry with me. I pray GOD to quell all
resentment in your heart, and send you his holy spirit to guide you
into all truth. Your brother’s eyes are now in some measure opened:
he is convinced of the perfect righteousness wrought out for him by
JESUS CHRIST, and ere now I hope hath received faith to apply it to
his heart. This is the doctrine of the church of _England_. Unless
you hold this and other evangelical principles, how, dear Sir, is it
consistent with sincerity to eat her bread? With humility, respect,
and love, do I offer these things to your consideration――Be pleased to
weigh them in a proper balance, and reflect from what principle they
are wrote, and I am persuaded you will not be offended at, reverend
and dear Sir,

                ♦Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘You’ replaced with ‘Your’


                             LETTER CXIX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. S――――_,

I Love an _Israelite_ indeed, I love a catholic spirit destitute
of guile; you I am persuaded are thus minded. The LORD hath highly
favoured you: he hath given you a meek and quiet spirit. My heart
hath been knit to you, ever since GOD first brought us together. Oh
pray, that what I admire in another, I may imitate myself, and have
the graces of JESUS CHRIST stamped upon my heart. It fills me with
confusion, whenever I consider how far I am from his likeness. Alas!
What would become of me, was I to be saved by any thing within myself.
Blessed be GOD, the LORD JESUS is my whole righteousness. By virtue
of that I know I am justified, I believe I shall be sanctified, and
am assured I shall be everlastingly redeemed: for GOD loved me with
an everlasting love. Oh, dear Sir, the prospect of an hereafter fills
my soul with comfort. Then shall I have enough of your company, and of
the other children of GOD. The LORD give me patience to wait till my
blessed change cometh. He often gives me such foretastes of the glory
to be revealed in us, that I want to leap my seventy years. But in
a degree, I may say with my blessed master, “I have a cup to drink
of, and a baptism to be baptized with.” Dear Mr. _S――――_ will see me
humbled, I believe, as much as once exalted; I look for “Away with him,
away with him,” every day. Then, I trust, I shall begin in earnest to
be a disciple of JESUS CHRIST. Even in such an hour, I believe dear
Mr. _S――――_ will dare own

            His affectionate though most unworthy friend,
                         brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

TO think, that you should be engaged publickly to pray for me, hath
often given me much satisfaction, and now excites me to send you this
letter of thanks: help me still, help me, dear Sir, by your prayers.
They will be a means of lifting up my hands when they hang down,
and of strengthning my feeble knees. Though in all things we do not,
yet in essentials we both think and speak the same things. I wish
all names among the saints of GOD were swallowed up in that one of
_Christian_.――I long for professors to leave off placing religion in
saying “I am a Churchman,” “I am a Dissenter.” My language to such
is, “Are you of CHRIST? If so, I love you with all my heart:” for this
reason chiefly, dear Sir, my heart is drawn out towards you. On this
account, though so long in CHRIST before me, I make bold to call you
brother, and to wish you GOD speed: blessed be his name, you have
little reason to cry out; “My leanness, my leanness.” Many gracious
souls are among your flock, they love to be fed with the sincere milk
of the word. I hope they will be your joy and crown of rejoicing
in the day of the LORD JESUS. I often think of them with pleasure;
pray salute them most affectionately in my name, and exhort them to
entreat the LORD that I may make full proof of my ministry. In about
a twelvemonth, GOD willing, I intend returning to _England_; I wish it
may be in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of peace. I think
you are happy in the acquaintance of Mr. _B―――― S――――_. I trust he
will be as good as he is great, and after he is made perfect through
manifold temptations and trials, sit down with you, and all the other
spirits of just men made perfect, in heaven. This is the hearty prayer
of, dear Sir,

            Your affectionate brother and fellow labourer
                       in our LORD’s vineyard,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXXI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Brother_,

YOU cannot conceive how often you have been upon my thoughts, since
I saw you. Eternity itself I hope will not diminish, but more and
more increase that love, which I bear you from my heart. Your stature
reminds me of little _Zaccheus_: he that called him, I am persuaded
hath called you: Have you not heard him say to your soul, “I am your
salvation?” If so, fear not, thou art a son of _David_. Let worldly
affairs be ever so bad, he that has given you his own dear Son, will
make you more than conqueror in all things. Still dare to own our dear
LORD before men. It is no scandal for a follower of JESUS CHRIST to
be poor. Our LORD was poor before us――So that we are rich in faith and
good works, it is not much ♦matter if we are not rich in this world’s
goods. Having CHRIST, though we have nothing else, we possess all
things. However, since godliness hath the promise of the life that now
is, as well as that which is to come, I would advise you to plead the
promises for temporal blessings. In the name of JESUS, many a sweet
morsel and opportune supply, have I fetched in from GOD by this means.
That is the way I live, and hope shall continue so to live till death
is swallowed up in victory. _Death_――what a comfortable word is that
for a believer! CHRIST hath taken the sting of it away; henceforward
it is no longer a king of terrors, but a welcome messenger to conduct
the saints to glory. My dear brother, let us comfort one another with
these things. We are not to live here always; our inheritance is above.
When CHRIST who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory. Why then should we value these light afflictions,
which are but for a moment? No, let us patiently bear our cross,
since we are so shortly to wear a crown. Oh the riches of free,
distinguishing grace! Why were you and I taken into favor? “Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.” O! my friend, my brother,
let us for ever extol free grace! However others exalt man and debase
GOD, let us exalt GOD and debase man. Let JESUS CHRIST have all the
glory: for he is the author, carrier on, and finisher of our faith. He
hath begun it in time, he shall compleat it in eternity.――My brother,
I have been so expanded whilst writing, that I must refer you to other
friends, to know how graciously GOD hath dealt with

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘mater’ replaced with ‘matter’


                            LETTER CXXII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. W._,

I Long to be in heaven, chiefly to see GOD even as he is; next, that
I may have my soul satisfied with the blissful communion of saints.
There I hope to see you and your wife, and to shew how sincerely I
love you both in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. My heart has went along
with my hand, when I used to stretch it out to you in the field.
I only wanted more time to converse with you. Oh my dear brother, let
us keep ourselves in the love of GOD through faith in CHRIST JESUS,
and then, yet a little while we shall meet in glory. As faith is
the beginning, so faith is the end of the christian course. Let
us keep this grace in continual exercise, and we may bid death and
hell defiance. Faith makes us more than conquerors over all; I speak
thus to you, because I hope you and dear Mrs. ―――― have been in
some measure made partakers of this free gift of GOD. I pray GOD to
increase it more and more, till it be swallowed up in the fruition of
our supreme good. Perhaps our faith may be put to the trial ere it be
long; I expect nothing but sufferings. Oh pray that I may be faithful
unto the end, and that a crown of life may be given to

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXIII.

                             _To Mr. H._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My dear Brother_,

THE christian love I bear to both your sister and you, excites me to
send you a line. Providence prevented your sailing with us; but as we
have drank into the same spirit, I hope brotherly love will continue
and increase between us, to all eternity. I have often wrestled in
prayer for you since we have been on board. Your sister has watered
those prayers with her tears, and I trust the LORD was entreated of
us. Our voyage has been highly profitable to our souls. I can never
be thankful enough for this sweet retreat. My dear brother, how do you
find your heart? Mine is like _Ezekiel’s temple_, the farther I search
into it, the greater abominations I discover; but there is a fountain
opened for sin and all uncleanness. There, my dear brother, we may
both wash and be made clean. The LORD hath already vouchsafed us some
assurances of his love. Oh let us continually keep faith in exercise,
till it be entirely swallowed up in the boundless ocean of the
beatific vision. That GOD may daily renew you by his spirit, and more
and more fit you for the happiness which awaits you above, is the
hearty prayer of

           Your affectionate though weak brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXIV.

                           _To Mrs. ――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _My Dear Friend_,

SHALL I have any leisure time and not write you a line of thanks for
your works of faith and labours of love? GOD forbid. I know not your
name, but I neither forget your house, nor favours. The LORD reward
you a thousand fold! I only fear that you have my person too much in
admiration. If you look to the instrument less, and to GOD more, it
will be better. By the grace of GOD alone, I am what I am. If any good
hath been done to you or others, it was not I, but the grace of GOD
that was in me. Oh, not unto me, not unto me, but unto GOD’s name be
all the glory. I pray GOD to make you partaker of the same grace; for
I would not have you an hearer only, I would have you a doer also.
Surely you are more noble and wise, than to deceive your own soul. And
yet it is but too notorious, that numbers rest in the outward form,
and are strangers to the inward power of godliness in their hearts.
Do not you so learn CHRIST. Beg of GOD that you may feel his spirit
working mightily in your soul, and witnessing with your spirit that
you are a child of GOD. I could go on, but other letters must be
wrote――Pray tender my love to all that dined with me at your house;
exhort them to keep close by faith to CHRIST, and to pray to and give
him thanks in my behalf; for he hath dealt most graciously with

                   Your obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXXV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. ――――_,

STILL I must repeat my former request. Be not angry because I did
not visit you oftener. I love, I honour you the more for being of
low degree. You are thereby rendered more conformable to our dear and
common LORD. His business alone prevented my seeing you so often as
I would. However, though absent, I rejoice that our Saviour has dealt
so lovingly with you. As afflictions have abounded, consolations
have much more abounded. I am persuaded, you can affirm that GOD is
the father of all mercies, and the GOD of all comforts. Has he not
comforted you my dear sister in all your tribulation? He that hath,
and does, will still deliver you. Yet a little while, and he that
cometh will come, and will not tarry. Shortly I suppose the earthly
house of this your tabernacle will be dissolved: fear not, you shall
then be cloathed upon with your house which is from heaven. Oh pray
that such honour may be also conferred on

                   Your unworthy brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXVI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. C――――_,

I Cannot forget your frequent attendance on my ministry when last at
London. I am pressed in spirit to write you a line, to exhort you to
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints. You have
learned the truth as it is in JESUS. You have been taught it of GOD.
Electing love hath snatched you as a brand out of the fire, and you
have followed our LORD without the camp, bearing his reproach. The
LORD’s tabernacle has lately been pitched in the fields. Ere long
it may be driven into the wilderness. I hope you will follow it even
there. The divine presence, I am persuaded, will accompany it. Hath
not your heart often burnt within you when the Scriptures have been
opening to you, though not under a church roof? GOD is not confined to
places. Wherever his people are, he will find and visit them. Our LORD
(oh stupendous love!) has been pleased to sail with us. I have tasted
both of his rod and staff; each has given me unspeakable comfort. My
dear brother, help me to praise him. Who so great, so good a GOD, as
our GOD? In about a twelve-month I hope to see you again. Oh pray
for me, my dear brother, that I may meanwhile be let further into the
mysteries of godliness, “GOD manifest in the flesh.” As yet, I find I
am but a child, and a meer novice. But this is my comfort, “The LORD
who has begun will carry on the good work,” till I am grown a strong
man in CHRIST JESUS. I long to know more of his love, I hunger and
thirst after the teachings of his blessed spirit. You, I am persuaded,
are no otherwise minded. Still press on and faint not. Yet a little
while and you shall enter into perfect joy with

          Your affectionate brother in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXVII.

                                          _New-York, Nov. 16, 1739._
_Reverend Sir_,

SEEING a passage in your letter to Mr. _P――――_ concerning me, I find
my heart immediately set to send you a line. I love to be acquainted
with the true and old servants of JESUS CHRIST, because I delight to
sit at their feet and receive instruction from them. You said right,
reverend Sir, when you said “I was but a young divine.” Indeed I am
a novice in the things of GOD. I can only say, that I desire to know
the whole will of GOD, that I may communicate it to others. CHRIST
is so good a master, that I would have all men drawn after him. He is
pleased to let me experience daily teachings of his blessed spirit,
and to show me the riches, freeness, and eternal duration of his
love.――But as yet I only see men as trees walking. Oh pray, reverend
Sir, that the LORD would again touch me, and enable me to see all
things clearly. I desire it only for the good of his church. Reverend
Sir, into what a lethargy is the christian world fallen! Foolish and
wise virgins are all slumbering and sleeping. It is high time for all
that love the LORD JESUS to lift up their voices like trumpets, and
to give warning of the bridegroom’s coming; many I hope are already
alarmed.――_Philadelphia_ people receive the gospel gladly. Here,
indeed, has been some little opposition, and therefore I hope success
will be given to the word, and what has been done in _England_, the
journal sent with this will inform you. Oh reverend Sir, I beseech you
give thanks for me with your whole heart. Entreat the LORD that I may
be kept humble and dependent upon our dear LORD JESUS. GOD willing,
in about seven months I hope to see _New England_ in my return to
_Europe_. An effectual door is there opened, and no wonder that there
are many adversaries. Shortly I expect to suffer for my dear master.
May I not deny him in that hour! If you would please to favour me with
a line, I should be glad to continue this correspondence, and acquaint
you from time to time how the work of GOD goes on. Mr. _N――――_ will
convey any thing you shall send. May the LORD richly reward both him
and you, for your love to

              The most unprofitable of all his servants,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXXVIII.

                                          _New York, Nov. 16, 1739._
  _Rev. Sir_,

MR. _N――――_, and the report of your sincere love for our dear LORD
JESUS, embolden me to write this. I rejoice for the great things GOD
has done for many souls in _Northampton_. I hope, GOD willing, to come
and see them in a few months. The journal sent with this, will shew
you what the LORD is about to do in _Europe_. Now is the gathering
time. A winnowing time will shortly succeed. Persecution and the
power of religion will always keep pace. Our LORD ’s word begins to be
glorified in _America_. Many hearts gladly receive it. Oh _Rev. Sir_,
it grieves me to see people, every where ready to perish for lack
of knowledge. I care not what I suffer, so that some may be brought
home to CHRIST. I am but a stripling, but the LORD chooses the weak
things of this world to confound the strong. I should rejoice to be
instructed by you. Mr. _N――――_ will convey a letter to me――May the GOD
of all grace give you all peace and joy in believing! May he increase
you more and more, both you and your children! May you every day be
feasted, and built up with fresh anointings of his blessed spirit! And
by your fervent prayers, may you be enabled to hold up the hands of,
reverend Sir,

          Your unworthy brother, fellow labourer and servant
                          in our dear LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXIX.

                                          _New York, Nov. 16, 1739._
  _Hon. Mother_,

LAST night GOD brought me hither in health and safety. I must not
omit informing you of it. Here is likely to be some opposition, and
consequently a likelihood that some good will be done. New friends are
raised up every day whithersoever we go; the people of _Philadelphia_
have used me most courteously, and many I believe have been pricked
to the heart. GOD willing, I leave this place next _Monday_, and in
about a fortnight think to set out for _Virginia_ by land. In about a
twelvemonth, I propose returning to _England_; expect then to have the
happiness of seeing me suffer for my master’s sake. Oh that GOD may
enable you to rejoice in it! If you have the spirit of CHRIST you will
rejoice, if not, you will be sorrowful. Oh my honoured mother, my soul
is in distress for you: Flee, flee I beseech you to JESUS CHRIST by
faith. Lay hold on Him, and do not let Him go. GOD hath given you
convictions. Arise, arise, and never rest till they end in a sound
conversion. Dare to deny yourself. My honoured mother, I beseech you
by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, dare to take up your cross and
follow CHRIST.

    I am, honoured mother, your ever dutiful though unworthy son,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXXX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. P――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I HAVE been much concerned since I saw you, lest I behaved not with
that humility toward you, which is due from a babe to a father in
CHRIST: but you know, reverend Sir, how difficult it is to meet with
success, and not be puffed up with it, and therefore if any such
thing was discernible in my conduct, oh pity me, and pray to the LORD
to heal my pride. All I can say is, that I desire to learn of JESUS
CHRIST to be meek and lowly in heart; but my corruptions are so strong,
and my employ so dangerous, that sometimes I am afraid. But wherefore
do I fear? He that hath given me himself, will he not freely give me
all things? By his help then I am resolved to ask till I receive, to
seek till I find, and to knock till I know myself. Blessed be GOD,
I have had a sweet retirement to search out my spirit and bewail
the infirmities of my public ministrations. Alas! who can hope to be
justified by his works? My preaching, praying, &c. are only _splendida
peccata_. The blood of CHRIST applied to my soul by a living faith, is
the only thing that can render them acceptable. This is the doctrine
which you, reverend Sir, have been enabled to preach, and for which
no doubt you have suffered reproach: But you are now almost at your
journey’s end. Yet a little while, and you shall enter into your
Master’s joy. In the mean while the LORD, I am persuaded, will keep
you as the apple of his eye. He will not forsake you when you are
grey-headed, and your strength faileth you. The moment you are ripe
for our common Master, he shall translate you to glory; _I præ,
sequar_. I am a child; I must be tutored and made meet by sufferings
to be a partaker of the heavenly inheritance with the saints in light:
But I am persuaded GOD will for CHRIST’s sake finally save, reverend
Sir,

             Your unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Brother J._,

INDEED I love you. Why? Because I hope you are an _Israelite_ indeed;
and one of those babes to whom it has been our LORD’s good pleasure
to reveal the mysteries of the kingdom of GOD. It is special; it is a
distinguishing gift. Be humble, dear _James_, be humble. Talk little,
and think much. A wise man will guide his words with discretion. Be
zealous for your dear Master. Let a zeal for his honour even eat you
up; but then beg of GOD that it may be according to knowledge. Stand
fast in the liberty wherewith CHRIST hath made you free, and be not
again entangled with a yoke of bondage. Join not one of your works
with your faith, in order to justify you before GOD: And if GOD gives
you a spirit of prayer and supplication, fear not to pray as the
spirit gives you utterance. Man may deride, but CHRIST will approve
and accept you. Dear _James_, you see I do not forget you. I hope your
little society increases, and that the LORD will always be adding to
it such as shall be saved. Salute them all most kindly in my name.
Exhort them to continue in the grace of GOD, and to pray for, dear
_James_,

           Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. S._,

HAS the LORD yet heard your prayer? Often have I heard you say, “Oh!
that I had received the faith!” As often, to the best of my knowledge,
have I said, “_Amen._” Ere now, I hope our common Master has fulfilled
all your petitions, and given you your heart’s desire. If not, what
hinders? Our LORD doth not want power, for he is Almighty; he does not
want a will, for he invites you to come unto him. Search your heart,
and see what is the reason the King of glory does not enter in. Is
it too full of the world? Renounce it. Do you not ask often enough?
Resolve to ask oftener. Do you look too much to some who say they have
received faith, but do not bring forth good fruit? Henceforward look
only to GOD and your own soul. Or do you not know the reason? Ask our
LORD to shew you, and indeed he will; for he hath promised to fulfil
the desires of them that fear him. Your _Cousin_ can assure you of
this. Oh follow him, as he does CHRIST, and you will be as happy as
your heart can wish. Dear Mrs. _S――――_, I am, with all possible thanks
for past favours,

                   Your obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXXXIII.

                         _To Mrs. Martha B._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _My dear Sister_,

I Call you not _Martha_, but MARY, for I hope you have chosen the
better part, which shall not be taken from you: And yet not so
properly may you be said to chuse, as the LORD to have chosen you;
for we love GOD, because he first loved us. I can trace my conversion
through its several steps, but cannot find one step I first took
towards GOD. I have been a backslider from my very infancy. Had not
GOD called after me, and by his spirit said unto me, as unto _Adam_,
“Where art thou? Into what a dreadful condition hast thou plunged
thyself?” I should have fled from him (if possible) for ever. I am
persuaded you, my dear Sister, can readily say the same; for otherwise
how can we truly value our LORD’s redeeming blood? How can we relish
the doctrine of GOD’s free grace, and our being freely justified by
faith which is in CHRIST JESUS? Oh let us beg of GOD to teach us these
divine truths more and more, (for he alone can teach them) and let us
lay out ourselves to teach them to others. You are happy in being in
fellowship with some, who I hope will be ready, if need be, to seal
these truths with their blood. Be humble, my dear Sister, be humble;
and cease not to pray for

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXIV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. H._,

RACHEL brings me glad tidings: She tells me the LORD hath touched
your heart by the power of his word, and that your relations have
threatened to cast you out for our LORD’s sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad. If you endure to the end, and naked follow a naked
CHRIST, great shall be your reward in heaven. There is no being a
christian without enduring contempt; no being happy hereafter, without
suffering reproach here. The world can only love its own. As they hate
GOD, so they must hate those that are desirous to be like him: But be
not dismayed; CHRIST’s strength shall be magnified in your weakness:
A living faith will support you under all. When your father and mother
forsake you, the LORD will take you up. The greatest foes you will
find to be those of your own heart. Subdue these, and outward crosses
will affect you but little. To conquer yourself will be a laborious
task; but if you believe, JESUS CHRIST shall even do this for you. Get
out of yourself, rely wholly on, and be a co-worker with him, and he
shall be to you wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
_Rachel_ greatly wishes this, but not more sincerely than

                  Your friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXV.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. P._,

WHAT a divine sympathy and attraction is there between all those who
by one spirit are made members of that mystical body, whereof JESUS
CHRIST is the head! I loved your departed wife, now with GOD. I love
your daughter, and the church in your house, in the bowels of JESUS
CHRIST. Blessed be GOD that his love is so far shed abroad in our
hearts, as to cause us to love one another, though we a little differ
as to externals: For my part, I hate to mention them. My one sole
question is, _Are you a christian?_ Are you sealed by CHRIST’s spirit
to the day of redemption? Are you hungering and thirsting after the
perfect, everlasting righteousness of JESUS CHRIST? If so, you are my
brother, my sister, and mother. I desire to love you as myself. This
is my temper; I am persuaded it is your’s. Why otherwise did you so
gladly receive me into your house? The LORD reward you and the rest of
your christian brethren. Indeed I am present with you in spirit, and
wish you good luck in the name of the LORD. O be not slack to praise
him in my behalf; for I have experienced some rich anointings of
his holy spirit, and have been made to see more into the wonders of
redeeming love. Did I know more of your names, I would write to more.
This is my comfort, I trust our names are written in the book of life.
Yet a little while, and we shall sit down together in the kingdom of
our Father. A place, though on a lower form, is, I humbly hope,
prepared for

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXVI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. H._,

IF I remember, you used to express a great value for my person and
doctrine, otherwise why should you desire a line from such a wretch
as I am? When I look into myself, and consider how poor and miserable,
and blind and naked my soul is, I wonder that any one should pay me
the least regard. But what shall we say? GOD will have mercy upon
whom he will have mercy. I am entirely indebted to free grace for all
I have, am, or shall be. You also, I trust, dear Sir, are ready to
subscribe to this; for what have we but what we have received? What
should we have been had GOD left us to ourselves? Oh let a sense of
this free, distinguishing love constrain us to obedience: A christian
needs no other motive. That is a true gospel-faith which works by love.
I often think it almost presumption to think of rewards in a future
state; my Master amply rewards me in this: But present mercies are
only earnests of future favours. Be not therefore, dear Sir, weary of
well-doing, for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. The LORD
hath multiplied his favours towards me since I saw you last. We have
had a long but pleasant and profitable voyage. Oh sing praises unto
our GOD in behalf of, dear Sir,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXXXVII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mrs. A._,

THESE words of the psalmist, “Let us rejoice in the strength of our
salvation,” often come with great power and comfort upon my soul. You
and I need take much notice of them: For otherwise how often should
we have fallen away from GOD since our first looking Zion-wards? But
the LORD as he loves us freely, so he will heal our backslidings.
He neither will let us fall into sin or error, so as finally to
destroy our souls. GOD forbid this should encourage us in sin. It
is only intended to support us in danger, and to strengthen us under
temptations. Since there is such infinite mercy with GOD, it is a
cogent reason why he should be loved and feared; but not why he should
be disobeyed: And since GOD has lately led you out of delusion, be
more watchful over yourself, my dear Sister, to follow those who truly
shew you the way of salvation.――To hear of your standing stedfast in
the LORD, will highly delight

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXXXVIII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. R. E._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Rev. and Dear Sir_,

THE cordial and tender love which I bear you, will not permit me to
neglect any opportunity of sending to you. I bless the LORD from my
soul, for raising you and several other burning and shining lights to
appear for him in this midnight of the church. My heart has been much
warmed during my voyage, by reading some of your sermons, especially
that preached before the associate presbytery. I long more and more to
hear the rise and progress of your proceedings, and how far you would
willingly carry the reformation of the church of _Scotland_. There
are some expressions which I suppose will be interpreted to your
disadvantage, both by your domestic and foreign enemies. I should be
glad to know who are those martyrs to which you refer, and of what
nature those _covenants_ were which you mention in your sermon. My
ignorance of the constitution of the _Scotch_ church is the cause of
my writing after this manner. I should be obliged to you, if you would
be pleased to recommend to me some useful books, especially such which
open the holy sacrament; for in GOD’s law is my delight. _Boston’s
fourfold State of Man_ I like exceedingly. Under GOD it has been
of much service to my soul. I believe I agree with you and him
in the essential truths of christianity. I bless GOD, his spirit
has convinced me of our eternal election by the Father through
the Son, of our free justification through faith in his blood, of
our sanctification as the consequence of that, and of our final
perseverance and glorification as the result of all. These I am
persuaded GOD has joined together; these, neither men nor devils shall
ever be able to put asunder. My only scruple at present is, “Whether
you approve of taking the sword in defence of your religious rights?”
One of our _English_ bishops I remember, when I was with him, called
you _Cameronians_. They, I think, took up arms, which I think to be
contrary to the spirit of JESUS CHRIST and his apostles. Some few
passages in your sermon before the presbytery, I thought were a little
suspicious of favouring that principle. I pray GOD your next may
inform me that I am mistaken: For when zeal carries us to such a
length, I think it ceases to be zeal according to knowledge. Dearest
Sir, be not angry at my writing thus freely. I love, I honour you in
the bowels, and for the sake of JESUS CHRIST, from my soul. I wish you
good luck in all your pious undertakings. I pray GOD to prosper the
works of your hands, and to make you a noble instrument in bringing
many sons to glory. Pray send an immediate answer, directed as usual,
and care will be taken to have it remitted to, reverend and dear Sir,

       Your most affectionate brother, friend, fellow-labourer,
                         and obliged servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXXXIX.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Brother_,

IT is much upon my heart to send you a line. Although you are not with
me, yet as GOD was pleased to touch you by my unworthy ministry, I
love you with a peculiar love. Business prevented my writing to you
when in _Yorkshire_. I was sorry to hear that Brother _J――――_ had
reason to blame your conduct. My dear brother, be not offended, if in
the meekness and gentleness of CHRIST, I exhort you to be sober-minded.
Follow after, but do not run before the blessed Spirit; if you do,
although you may benefit others, and GOD may over-rule every thing for
your good, yet you will certainly destroy the peace of your own soul.
GOD has been pleased to call you by his grace, and to give you joy
in the Holy Ghost: But, my brother, I hope it will be more settled
and substantial, and joined with meekness and humility of heart. A
joy which is the result of inward trials, and flowing from a long
experience of the buffeting of satan. Such a joy will make you apt
and fit to teach, and keep you from being puffed up above measure. It
will exalt, at the same time as it humbles your soul. The LORD direct
my dear brother in all things: I wish all his servants were prophets;
but let every one be rightly persuaded of his call to public teaching.
It is dangerous to touch the ark, though it be falling, without a
commission from above. But no more. I am

              Your most affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXL.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. B._,

YOUR kind present of flour has been of singular use to me and my
family; I pray GOD, in return, to feed you with that bread which
cometh down from heaven. You are one of my first and choicest friends.
You have not been ashamed to own me, or to attend on my ministry.
It will wonderfully rejoice me, to see you exalted at our LORD’s
right-hand in a future state. The way you know. JESUS CHRIST is the
way, the truth, and the life. Through faith in his blood shall you
have free access into the holy of holies. I hope dear Mr. _B._ is not
in the number of those, who want to make a Saviour of their own works,
and thereby deny the LORD, who has so dearly bought them with his
precious blood: No, I am persuaded you are more noble. Mr. _B――――_
has not so learnt CHRIST. He is willing, I trust, to ascribe his
salvation to GOD’s free grace, and to let JESUS CHRIST be all in all.
I hope your brother, and those young men you brought with you out of
_Spittlefields_, are likewise thus minded. Though absent, yet I do
not forget them. O exhort them from me, to save themselves from this
untoward generation. My dear friend, do you go before them, and let
them learn of you how to walk with GOD. It is a difficult thing to
be a christian indeed. Numbers are _Pharisees_, and do not know it. I
pray GOD you may be delivered from them, and be made experimentally to
know that no one can call JESUS CHRIST “his LORD,” till he has really
received the Holy Ghost. I could dwell on this, but other business
obliges me to hasten to subscribe myself, dear Mr. _B――――_,

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXLI.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Reverend Sir_,

I AM not willing to go on shore till I have performed my promise,
and sent you a line. I heartily wish I could write something which
might advance the glory of GOD and the good of his church. As we both
profess ourselves ministers of the gospel, these two things ought
to be our chief and only concern, and more especially at this time,
when men seek their own and not the things of the LORD JESUS. Oh,
_dear Sir_, the care of souls I find to be a matter of the greatest
importance. You have a great number committed to your charge. What
a dreadful thing will it be for any of them to perish through your
neglect? And yet I fear, Sir, you do not walk worthy of the holy
vocation wherewith you are called. It is no good report that I hear
of you in common life. Your practice contradicts your doctrine, and
what good can you do, if every one of your parishioners, whilst you
are preaching, may reply, “Physician heal thyself?” Besides, Sir,
how can you preach CHRIST to others, when you are a stranger to his
power yourself? It is next to impossible. I make no apology for this
plainness of speech. Simplicity becomes embassadors of CHRIST. I am,
reverend Sir,

                   Your obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Dear Mr. G._,

INDEED I love you, though it was so long before I came to see you.
Want of time, not of respect, was the cause. GOD is my judge how
earnestly I long after your salvation, and how willingly I would spend
and be spent in order to promote it. Oh how closely does true faith
in JESUS CHRIST our head, knit all his members in love to one another;
what a divine harmony and attraction is there between them, when they
have drank into and been made partakers of one and the same spirit?
How does the love of GOD dilate and enlarge their hearts! How do all
little distinctions about externals fall away, and every other name
is swallowed up in the name of JESUS CHRIST? This, my dear brother, is
that catholic spirit, which will cement all denominations of sincere
professors together. This is the spirit of which free distinguishing
grace has made you a partaker, and which I pray GOD we both may
partake of every day more and more. He is faithful who has promised,
who also will do it. I find it is not in vain that we have believed
in JESUS. He is GOD, and his work is perfect; his love is like himself
unchangeable; his gifts and callings are without repentance, and
therefore, though I am but a babe in CHRIST, yet I am persuaded I
shall see you crowned with glory. Then, my dear brother, we shall
have time enough together. Then, there will be no parting, no fear of
falling; but we shall drink eternally of those pleasures which flow
from GOD’s right hand for evermore. Supported with this hope, what
hinders but I may come once again, when the LORD permits, and offer
CHRIST’s everlasting righteousness to poor perishing sinners. The
devil and his servants will rage horribly, and perhaps cast me into
prison, nay, put me to death: But if you will come and visit me, by
the help of my GOD, I will preach to you even there; for I am not
ashamed of the gospel of CHRIST. I have felt it to be the power of
GOD unto my salvation. Oh, my brother, the fire kindles whilst I am
writing; but I must have done. Pray salute those dear souls that I
spoke to at your house, and all other friends. Entreat them to pray
and give thanks for me; and assure them they are not forgotten by

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLIII.

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739._
  _Mr. H――――_,

AS you stand so nearly related to your daughter, who is with me,
though I am unknown to you in person, yet I make bold to send you a
line to inform you of her welfare. I find she did not confer much with
you about her intended voyage; but I hope both you and her will have
great reason to rejoice in the end. GOD has been pleased to visit her
with some illness, but now she is perfectly recovered. What is best
of all, I hope her soul prospers, and is fitting more day by day for
the enjoyment of GOD. This was the chief end of her going abroad, and
give me leave to tell you, this is the chief thing you ought, and must
pursue at home. But why do I say at home? A christian hath no home
but heaven. He is a stranger and pilgrim while here on earth. I hope
you know better, Mr. _H――――_, than to think you was born to drive a
team, or plough a piece of ground. These things must be done, but then
they should be done in subordination to the care of your better part,
the soul. Your daughter tells me, you are now grey headed. Take heed,
dear Mr. _H――――_, to make your calling and election sure. Rest not
in outward things. Do not flatter yourself that you are a christian,
because you go to church, and do no one any harm. Nothing but a living
faith in CHRIST JESUS our dear LORD, can qualify you for eternal life.
Without this, GOD will be to us a consuming fire; and unless we are
born again, and made new creatures in CHRIST, we never shall enter
into the kingdom of GOD. If you know not what I mean by these terms,
you may depend upon it, you are a stranger to this new-birth, and
consequently in a state of death: but you need not fear; even at the
eleventh hour CHRIST will accept you, if you come to him by faith. He
hath shewn mercy to your son and daughter. Why may he not shew mercy
to their father also? Whosoever cometh to him, he will in no-wise cast
out. Haste then, dear Sir, out of your spiritual _Sodom_. Linger not.
Nothing will more rejoice your dear children, than to see you brought
to an experimental knowledge of the truth, that you may be saved. For
their sakes, you are particularly remembered by

        Your unknown but sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLIV.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. P――――._

                       _Upper Marlborough (Mary Land) Dec. 8, 1739_.
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

TILL now, I have neither had leisure nor freedom to answer your kind
letter. Blessed be GOD, who has opened the hearts of some of his
people at _New York_ to receive the word. May he enable you to water
what his own right hand hath planted, and grant to your labours a
divine increase! Indeed I wish you good luck in the name of the LORD.
I wish all his servants were prophets. Oh that he would be pleased
to send forth experimental labourers into his harvest:――for I fear
amongst you, as well as in other places, there are many who are
well versed in the doctrines of grace, having learned them at the
university, but notwithstanding are heart-hypocrites, and enemies
to the power of godliness.――_Dear Sir_, I use this freedom, because
I love simplicity. I confess I am but a child in grace, as well as
years. Pardon this freedom, for out of the fulness and sincerity of my
heart my pen writeth.――I thank your son and _dear Mr. S――――_ for what
they did on my account. Alas, I fear they think too highly of me. Oh
dear Sir, entreat the GOD of all grace to give me humility, so shall
success not prove my ruin. My most cordial respects and hearty thanks
attend dear _Mrs. P――――_, I pray GOD in all things to make her a
help meet for you――As fast as I can snatch a few moments from public
business, more _New York friends_ may expect to hear from me――A sense
of their favours is still upon my heart――I would willingly remember
them, whenever I go in and out before the LORD. Mr. _N――――_’s letter,
and my next journal, will acquaint you, how the LORD JESUS has been
getting himself the victory, since I left _New York_――There has been
such little opposition, that I have been tempted almost to cry out,
“Satan, why sleepest thou?” But GOD pities my weakness. Oh, dear Sir,
thank him in my behalf, for indeed he deals most lovingly with, Rev.
Sir,

           Your most unworthy brother and fellow-labourer,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXLV.

                                  _Upper Marlborough, Dec. 8, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Cannot defer writing to dear Mr. _N――――_ any longer.――This afternoon
GOD brought us hither. Some are solicitous for my staying here
to-morrow. As it seems to be a call from providence, I have complied
with their request. Oh that I may be enabled to lift up my voice like
a trumpet, and to speak with the demonstration of the spirit and with
power. These parts are in a dead sleep. At _Anapolis_, I preached
twice, and spoke home to some ladies concerning the vanity of their
false politeness. But alas, they are wedded to their _Quadrille_ and
_Ombre_. The minister of the place was under convictions――He wept
twice, and earnestly begged my prayers. He will not frighten people I
believe with harsh doctrine,――he loves to prophesy smooth things.――GOD
blessed the word wonderfully at _Philadelphia_. I have great reason
to think many are brought home to GOD. When I return, it will then be
seen, who has received the word into an honest and good heart. By the
divine assistance, I propose revisiting _Philadelphia_, _New York_,
and to go as far as _Boston_, and so return to _Georgia_, before I
take shipping again for _England_――The LORD direct my going in his
way! About _May_ you may expect to see me. My dear friend, pray
that I may so improve the time of my absence, that at my return my
progress may be made known to all men. It shames me to see what little
proficiency I have made in the school of CHRIST. If I do not begin
to press forwards, how shall I appear before my blessed LORD? I feel
myself to be the chief of sinners; surely never was a greater instance
of redeeming distinguishing love. GOD forbid that I should glory in
any thing but free grace: had not GOD plucked me as a brand out of the
fire, I had now either been given over to a reprobate mind, or cast
into a place of torment. Oh help me, help me, _dearest Mr. N――――_,
help me to be thankful, and accept my thanks, though late, for all
favours received when at _New York_. Indeed I love you in the bowels
of our dear LORD JESUS. Salute your dear wife my kind hostess: exhort
her to be severely kind to her little boy.――My most cordial respects
attend all who ask after me. Entreat them to continue their prayers,
dearest Mr. _N――――_, for

             Your weak, but affectionate friend, brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLVI.

                           _To Mr. B――――._

                                  _Upper Marlborough, Dec. 8, 1739._
  _Dear Sir_,

GRATITUDE obliges me to send you a letter of thanks for your last kind
present, and all other favours; but the love of our LORD JESUS CHRIST
constrains me to write to you, exhorting you earnestly to contend
for the faith once delivered to the saints. I humbly hope the LORD
has been pleased to bless my coming in these parts to many, and
amongst them to you also. It rejoiced me to find dear _Mr. B――――_
was convinced that I preached the truth as it is in JESUS. It pleased
me exceedingly, to find how his eyes were opened to see the direct
contrariety there is, between the spirit of CHRIST and the spirit of
the world. What has my dear friend now to do, but to prosecute these
convictions, and never rest till they end in a sound conversion. GOD
has given you richly all things to enjoy. Be persuaded henceforward
not to be so cumbered about the many trifles of this life, as to
neglect the one thing needful, Dare, Sir, to be singularly good, Oh
dare to let your light shine before men――Be not ashamed of CHRIST
and his gospel. Come out from your carnal acquaintance, and live as
becomes a true follower of our LORD JESUS. Dear _Mr. B――――_, I hope
will join with you. GOD’s spirit has been and is now striving with his
heart. I pray GOD to make this the accepted time, and cause it to be
the day of his salvation. How will it fill me with joy at my return
to _Philadelphia_, to see dear _Mr. B――――_ and some other excellent
well-meaning people, whom I love, become despised followers of the
Lamb of GOD. If my prayers may be any ways assisting, as GOD shall
enable me you may depend on them――Our dear friend _B――――_ can inform
you what GOD has done for us, since we saw you. One favour more I beg
of you; give thanks as well as pray for

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLVII.

                         _To Captain B――――._

                          _Williamsburgh, (Virginia) Dec. 15, 1739._

HITHER GOD brought us last night; I trust the same gracious being,
by his good providence, has conducted you safe to _Philadelphia_.
I cannot say, I have met with so much as even an _almost christian_,
since I parted from you, till I came to _Colonel Whiting_’s――There,
GOD put in my way a planter, that is seeking to know the way of GOD
more perfectly――He is now with us, and I hope our conversation will
be blessed unto him. Oh dear _Mr. B――――_, strive, I beseech you by the
mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, strive to enter in at the strait gate.
GOD of late has loudly called you――Take heed that neither the lust of
the eye, the lust of the flesh, nor the pride of life prevail on you
to lie down in a carnal security again. I am confident you will be
most heartily despised, if you are a real christian; but dear _Mr.
B――――_’s resolution will be built on a better foundation, than to let
a little breath blow it down. In CHRIST is your strength; look up to
him day by day, and as your day is, so shall your strength be. I fear
and pray for you. GOD only knows, how often you have been upon my
heart. We have not failed interceding for you at the throne of grace.
I shall be much mistaken, if _Mr. B――――_ does not prove a christian
indeed. About _May_ I propose, GOD willing, to be with you again. Then
I shall rejoice to sit and hear you tell what GOD has done for your
soul――Be not afraid of conviction. Be not afraid of inward feelings.
Now pray to the LORD JESUS, to lay the ax of mortification to the root
of your heart. Make thorough work with it. Do not spare yourself in
the least.――Now is the accepted time, and that it may be the day of
salvation, is the earnest prayer of, dear _Mr. B――――_,

       Your obliged affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXLVIII.

                    _To the Rev. Mr. G―――― T――――._

                                     _Williamsburgh, Dec. 15, 1739._
  _My dear Brother_,

BE not angry because you have not heard from me. Indeed I love and
honour you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. You are seldom out of my
thoughts; but till now I have not had liberty given me, to send you a
line――I trust the work goes on gloriously in your parts. The hand of
the LORD brought wondrous things to pass, before we left _Pensilvania_;
but in these parts satan seems to lead people captive at his will. The
distance of the plantations prevents people’s assembling themselves
together.――Here are no great towns, as in other provinces, and the
commonalty is made up of _Negroes_ and _convicts_, and if they pretend
to serve GOD, their masters, _Pharaoh_ like, cry out, “Ye are idle,
ye are idle.” Last night I read the affecting account of your brother
_John_; let me die, O LORD, the death of that righteous man, and let
my future state be like his! O my dear friend, my brother, entreat the
LORD that I may grow in grace, and pick up the fragments of my time,
that not a moment of it may be lost. Teach me, oh teach me the way of
GOD more perfectly. Rebuke, reprove, exhort me with all authority――I
feel I am but a babe in CHRIST. I long to know more of the holy JESUS.
He has manifested himself to my soul, both in a way of humiliation and
exaltation. Since I saw you, both his rod and staff have comforted me.
At present, he makes me young and lively as an eagle; I only wish I
was more worthy to subscribe myself

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXLIX.

                             _To Mrs. C._

                                 _Newton, Cape Fear, Dec. 28, 1739._
  _My dear Sister in CHRIST_,

JUST now we have been singing the hymn, which we sung at _Broad-oak_;
and as I generally do at such seasons, I thought of that happy
time wherein we sung it in your great hall. It was a time much to
be remembered, an anticipation, I believe, of that blessed time
when we all shall meet to sing the song of the Lamb in the heavenly
Jerusalem――For the adoption of the spirit, if truly received, is the
earnest of our promised inheritance. We are sealed thereby to the
day of redemption, and therefore may give both men and devils the
challenge to separate us, if they can, from the love of GOD which is
in CHRIST JESUS our LORD――I am verily persuaded, that since I left
you, all things have worked together for your good. As I am travelling,
often does my soul think both of you and yours, and out of the fulness
of my heart, do I often pour forth this or such like petitions,
“Dearest LORD, be for ever gracious to the houshold of ――――!” My
conscience hath smote me frequently, for not writing you a longer
letter. I send this to ask pardon, and to assure you how often you
and your daughters are upon my heart, when I go in and out before the
LORD――I long to hear how the LORD JESUS hath magnified his strength in
your weakness. It would fill a volume to tell his goodness and truth;
and my base ingratitude sometimes comes with such conviction upon my
heart, that I can scarce forbear getting off my horse, and humbling
myself in the way side. Indeed, I am the chief of sinners, and yet
overflowing hath the LORD JESUS been in his love. You will hear more
soon by the journal which will be sent. Dear _Mrs. C――――_, my love to
all.

         Your affectionate though unworthy brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER CL.

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 16, 1740._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

WITH much pleasure (tho’ not till last week) I received your kind
affectionate letter. I thank you for it with all my soul, and pray GOD
to reward you for this, and all other your works of faith and labours
of love. You may depend on my not being prejudiced against you or
your brethren, by any evil report. They only endear you to me more
and more; and were your enemies to represent you as black as hell,
I should think you were the more glorious in the sight of heaven.
Your sweet criticisms and remarks upon my journal and sermons, were
exceeding acceptable, and very just. I assure you, dear Sir, I am
fully convinced of the doctrine of election, free justification, and
final perseverance. My observations on the Quakers, were only intended
for those particular persons with whom I then conversed. The tenets
of the quakers in general, about _justification_, I take to be false
and unscriptural. Your adversaries need take no advantage against you,
by any thing I have written; for I think it every minister’s duty to
declare against the corruptions of that church to which they belong,
and not to look upon those as true members of their communion, who
deny its publick constitutions. This is your case in _Scotland_,
and ours in _England_. I see no other way for us to act at present,
than to go on preaching the truth as it is in JESUS; and then if our
brethren cast us out, GOD will direct us to take that course which
is most conducive to his glory, and his people’s good. I think I have
but one objection against your proceedings; “Your insisting only on
_presbyterian government_, exclusive of all other ways of worshipping
GOD.” Will not this, _dear Sir_, necessarily lead you (whenever you
get the upper-hand) to oppose and persecute all that differ from you
in their church government, or outward way of worshipping GOD? Our
dear brother and fellow-labourer Mr. _G―――― T――――_ thinks this will
be the consequence, and said he would write to you about it. As for
my own part, (though I profess myself a minister of the church of
_England_) I am of a _catholic spirit_; and if I see a man who loves
the LORD JESUS in sincerity, I am not very solicitous to what outward
communion he belongs. The kingdom of GOD, I think, does not consist
in any such thing. These are my sentiments, dear Sir, and I write them
out of love――I am ashamed (because only a babe in CHRIST) to pretend
as it were to direct; but true friendship needs no apology. GOD
is doing great things in _America_. My journal, which I send over
with this, will shew you what he has done already. Your welfare is
much upon my heart, and as I am enabled, I make mention of you in my
prayers. Affairs of the Orphan-house go on well. Some few, even _here_,
love the LORD JESUS. Oh, dear Sir, pray for us, and especially for

      Your weak unworthy brother and fellow-labourer in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLI.

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 22, 1740._
  _My Hon. Friend and Brother in CHRIST_,

YOUR last letter quite confounded me. What am I, that I should be
thus highly favoured! I can only say, that “Less than the least of
all GOD’s mercies,” shall be my motto still. I have experienced many
inward trials, since I saw you last. But I find they work continually
for my good. I rejoice in what our dear LORD JESUS has done for your
soul. May a double portion of his blessed spirit rest upon you; may
our glorious ever-blessed _Emanuel_ cause all his glory to pass before
you, and may you be filled with all the fulness of GOD! Since my
arrival here, I have received a sweet endearing instructive letter
from _Mr. Ralph E――――_; I have answered it, and told him you promised
to write about the necessity of a catholic spirit. _ Dr. C――――_ also
has favoured me with a loving epistle. I have received and read his
sermons since I saw you: they are acute and pointed, but I think not
searching enough by many degrees――My dear brother, I love writers that
go to the bottom――GOD willing, I hope to be with you at the synod――But
what think you? I am sometimes doubting, whether I shall have
sufficient matter given me to preach upon. Methinks I hear you say,
“O thou of little faith! wherefore dost thou doubt? As thy day is, so
shall thy strength be.” _Michael_ and the dragon, I hear, are carrying
on war most bravely in _England_. I really believe we shall not die,
till we see the kingdom of GOD come with power. The affairs of the
orphan-house are in great forwardness. I have much to say; but time
and business will not permit. Blessed be GOD, eternity is at hand,
and then we shall have time enough. I have read some of your books
to my great profit. I want to be taught the way of GOD more perfectly
all the day long. My tenderest respects await the brethren; my dear
fellow-travellers salute you――You are often remembered both by them,
and

       Your affectionate though very weak and unworthy brother,
                servant and fellow-labourer in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLII.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. C._

                                           _Savannah, Jan. 24, 1740_
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Received your kind, though undeserving letter, and now snatch a few
moments from my other avocations, in order to send you a short answer.
May GOD who knits the elect in one communion and fellowship, sanctify
our friendship and correspondence to the stirring up each other to
love and to good works!――It pleased me to find you breathe so catholic
a spirit.――O that bigotry and party zeal were not so much as once
named amongst us, as becometh saints! Since CHRIST is not divided in
himself, why should christians be divided one amongst another? Bigotry,
I am sure, can never be the fruit of that wisdom which cometh from
above.――No, it is earthly, sensual, and devilish. When I come to _New
England_ I shall endeavour to recommend an universal charity amongst
all the true members of CHRIST’s mystical body. Perhaps therefore,
the fields may be the most unexceptionable place to preach in. You and
your brethren, I am persuaded, will follow our LORD even without the
camp, and rejoice to bear his sacred reproach. Assist me, dear Sir,
in your prayers, that my coming may be in the fulness of the gospel
of peace――I shall come only with my sling and with my stone.――If
the LORD shall be pleased so to direct me, that I may strike some
self-righteous _Goliahs_ to the heart, I know you will rejoice with,
Rev. and dear Sir,

    Yours most affectionately in the love of our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLIII.

                            _To Mr. W. D._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _My dear Brother in CHRIST_,

BLESSED be GOD, for the good report I hear of your zeal for our dear
_Emanuel_. Go on, I beseech you by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS;
go on, and I am persuaded the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in
your hands. If I am thrown aside as a broken vessel, so I see you and
others stirred up to carry on our dear LORD ’s kingdom, if my heart
does not deceive me, I shall rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. GOD
blesses the affairs of the orphan-house. The work is large, but we
have omnipotence for our support.――I believe I shall take in near
fifty children. GOD lets me see every day, that he orders my goings.
He visits me with inward trials; but if I had not such thorns in
the flesh, what would become of me? Fear not to speak the truth; if
driven out of _England_, here is a noble range for you in _America_.
At present I am restrained; but I could not rest, without letting you
have a line from

         Your most affectionate friend brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLIV.

                             _To Mrs. D._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _Dear Madam_,

I Rejoice to hear that you are likely to be cast out of your mother’s
Will _only_ for following CHRIST. This may be only the beginning
of temptations. GOD, I believe, out of love will try you to the
uttermost. You have drank deep of heavenly comforts; you must pledge
our LORD in his cup of sufferings. Those who saw him on mount _Tabor_
afterwards were with him in the garden. But fear not――The LORD is with
you――Neither men nor devils shall hurt you. The sweet communion we
have had with GOD, and through him with one another, often comforts my
soul. Who knows, but that time may be again repeated? Indeed, I want
words as well as time to express with what thankfulness I desire to
subscribe myself, dear madam,

    Your unworthy brother and obliged servant in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLV.

                           _To Captain M._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Rejoice to hear of your good health, and take this opportunity of
sending you Mr. _Law_’s and Mr. _Haliburton_’s life; which I pray GOD
to sanctify to your benefit and comfort. I hope you will watch over
your heart, and take care to keep up those convictions, which GOD
once put into your soul. I am afraid of Mr. _B._ The world, the world
I fear has got hold of him. Dear Captain _M――――_, I trust, will not
desert his Master.――I am sure he would die, rather than prove false to
an earthly prince.――Oh let him not desert his dear Redeemer’s colours.
Dear Sir, beg of GOD to root out of your heart a desire for that
honour which cometh of man. Till dead to the world you will not be
alive to GOD. _Honour_, falsely so called, has destroyed millions.
That you may be never carried away with, or ruined by it, is the
hearty prayer of, dear Sir,

                             Your’s, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLVI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. W. T._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _My dear and honoured Brother_,

BLESSED be GOD, who hath pleasure in the prosperity of his
servants.――I am abased to think what our all-gracious Redeemer hath
done by my unworthy hands, and rejoice to hear that he is working by
your’s. Oh that you may experience fresh anointings and teaching from
above! O that you may be strengthened by GOD’s mighty power in the
inner man, and pull down satan’s strong-holds daily. GOD willing,
I hope to be with you at the Synod. I find as yet I scarce know any
thing; but if I give out of my little stock, I trust the LORD will
increase it, as he did the little lad’s loaves and fishes. My journal,
which I have sent to _Philadelphia_, will tell you what GOD has done
in _Maryland_ and _Virginia_. A foundation of great things I believe
is laying here. Oh pray that a sense of his own littleness, may be
given to

            Your affectionate, though unworthy brother and
                      fellow-labourer in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLVII.

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _My dear Sister_,

I Rejoice to hear that you are enabled to see not only the freeness
but eternal duration of GOD’s grace. Till the sinner is convinced of
this, I am persuaded he can neither work from a principle of true love,
nor give JESUS CHRIST the honour due unto his name. He must always be
making his salvation to depend _partly_ at least on his own doings;
“If I do so and so, JESUS CHRIST will give me his grace:” But can
any believer who knows himself, help confessing, that after he
had received grace, he should have finally fallen from it, had the
continuance of it depended on his own will? Indeed, my dear Sister,
nothing so much comforts my own soul as the thought that GOD will
never leave me nor forsake me; if he does, it must be for my
unworthiness: But on that account it cannot be; for he never chose me
on account of my unworthiness. He loved me freely, he prevented me by
his grace; he chose me from eternity, he called me in time, and I am
persuaded will keep me till time shall be no more.――This consideration
makes my faith to work by love. Now, I can live not barely upon my
frames, which notwithstanding are blessed things, but on the promises.
Now, I can go on my way rejoicing, and, amidst all dejections, lift up
my head in prospect of a certain and exceeding weight of glory. Though
I fall, I know I shall rise again; for he that is brought truly to
believe on JESUS CHRIST, his faith shall never die. The LORD JESUS
will not suffer to be lost the purchase of his blood. He knew for whom
he died, and neither men nor devils shall ever pluck them out of his
hands. Such as have been taught most of GOD, I find, are thus minded.
And I am persuaded were the effects of our LORD’s redemption to depend
on a man’s own compliance, or was the continuance of GOD’s grace
to depend solely on man’s improvement, JESUS CHRIST would have died
in vain. _Adam_ could not stand in paradise when left to his own
free-will, how then can we? No, blessed be GOD, our salvation is put
into better hands than our own. JESUS CHRIST has purchased not only
wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, but also eternal redemption
for us. Let this thought, my dear Sister, lift up our hands when they
hang down, and strengthen our feeble knees; GOD’s gifts and callings
are without repentance. There is no condemnation to them that are
truly in CHRIST JESUS. And I write thus peremptorily to you, because
I find now you are able to bear it.――Blessed be GOD! my dear Sister,
flesh and blood has not revealed this unto you. I hope ere long our
brethren will lay all carnal reasoning aside, and see and preach the
truth in this respect, as it is in JESUS. My kindest love to your
sister.――What I write to one, I write to both. The LORD direct your
going in his way, and cause you to continue instant in prayer for

               Your weak brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLVIII.

                      _To Mrs. Elizabeth W――――._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _My dear Sister_,

I Have been just reading over your letter, and felt a sweet sympathy
with the writer. Oh that it may increase till we are filled with all
the fulness of GOD! Some passages in your letter were dangerous to
my soul. Whenever you see any growth of grace, pray that I may grow
in humility in particular. Oh that I was lowly in heart! Honour
and dishonour, good report and evil report would then be alike,
and prove a furtherance to me in my christian cause.――I believe the
time is shortly coming in which I am to endure something for my LORD
and Master; then will I cry out, Who is on the LORD’s side? Nothing
supports me under a prospect of a trying time, so much as a sense of
GOD’s everlasting love. I am persuaded, that neither men nor devils
shall ever pluck me out of his Almighty hands. Let this support you,
my dear Sister, in your change of life. Wherever you are, I am
confident you will have reason to say, “Surely GOD is in this place.”
That you may wax stronger and stronger, and ripen daily for glory, is
the hearty prayer of

     Your affectionate brother and servant in our dear _Emanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLIX.

                            _To Mr. J. N._

                                          _Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Hope you will excuse my not answering your kind letter sooner.――The
many avocations that at present surround me, prevented it. I rejoice
to hear that our LORD JESUS is getting himself the victory in the
hearts of poor sinners. I hope many will now rejoice in his salvation.
One good sign is, that he has employed the meanest, as well as vilest
wretch, that he ever yet sent forth.――When I hear that any good is
done by my unworthy hands, it almost makes me to blush.――Oh that I
could humble myself in the dust, that the LORD alone may be exalted in
his strength. I purpose to revisit _New-York_ at the appointed time.
You told me, “Our LORD has not sent me into his vineyard at my own
charge.” Indeed, I always find he furnishes me with things convenient:
Nay, he is often so abundant in goodness and truth, that I am obliged
to cry out in holy admiration, “My LORD and my GOD!” Dear Sir, help me
to be thankful. Blessed be GOD, the Orphan-house affairs succeed well.
Many souls will be redeemed by it from temporal, and I trust, from
eternal bondage. I have taken in upwards of twenty children already,
and I take in more daily.――I am building a large house, have many
servants, and a good stock of cattle. It will cost much money.――But
our LORD will see to that. My friends at _New-York_ will assist me
when I come amongst them. Oh that my coming may be in the fulness of
the blessings of the gospel of peace! I am persuaded, you will not be
wanting in your prayers on behalf of, dear Sir,

           Your obliged friend and servant in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLX.

                      _To Mrs. Elizabeth D――――._

                                           _Savannah, Feb. 1, 1740._
  _My dear Sister in CHRIST_,

I Generally observe that whom the LORD loves, for the most part he
keeps from preferment.――Your grandmother cannot do any more than
she is permitted. It is GOD’s free grace alone, that has made the
difference between us and others. Oh that we were duly sensible of
electing love! Indeed it must necessarily constrain us to obedience. I
am glad you like _Boehm_. His works are truly evangelical, and afford
sweet nourishment to the new-born soul. The nearer we come to GOD,
the better we shall relish searching books. It is an evident sign of
a false heart, when it is unwilling to be probed. Blessed be GOD, you
are not thus minded. I trust the LORD JESUS has apprehended you, and
will henceforward never let you go. O that I may hear of your growth
in grace, and of your zeal for the LORD OF HOSTS.――You do well to go
about doing good; your Master did so before you. Dare, _dear Miss_, to
follow his good example, and never fear the revilings of men. Set your
face as a flint against all the adversaries of our LORD; for shortly
you shall tread all your enemies under feet. I beseech you by the
mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS our Saviour, to keep up a close walk
and communion with GOD. Nothing else can preserve you from idols;
and you know when once the soul is off its watch, the devil makes sad
ravages in it. There is nothing I dread more than having my heart
drawn away by earthly objects.――When that time comes, it will be over
with me indeed; I must then bid adieu to zeal and fervency of spirit,
and in effect, bid the LORD JESUS to depart from me. For alas, what
room can there be for GOD, when a rival hath taken possession of the
heart? Oh my dear Sister, pray that no such evil may befal me. My
blood runs cold at the very thought thereof. I cannot, indeed; I
cannot away with it. In a multiplicity of business, have I wrote you
these lines. I thank you for your kind letter, and hope I shall always
retain a grateful sense of the many favours I have received from your
dear family. My kindest respects attend your sister; I long to hear
of her being brought into the glorious liberty of the children of GOD.
How does your father? Oh that he may have a well-grounded interest
in CHRIST! How does my dear brother _Charles_? I pray GOD to fill him
with all joy and peace in believing. And how does your little sister?
Dearest Redeemer, keep her unspotted from the world! My heart is now
full. Writing quickens me. I could almost drop a tear, and wish myself,
for a moment or two, in _England_. But hush, nature: GOD here pours
down his blessings on

              Your sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLXI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. D. R._

                                           _Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740._
  _My reverend and dear Brother_,

I Received your kind letter just on my arrival at this place.――My
journal, which I suppose you will have read ere this reaches _Wales_,
can best inform you what GOD hath done for my own and other people’s
souls.――Even here, he is pleased to be with and assist us. The Orphan-
house goes on bravely. I believe I shall take in near fifty children
before I return to _England_. He that feedeth the young ravens which
call upon him, will not suffer them to want.――I rejoice to hear that
the LORD JESUS is so publicly confessed among your countrymen.――If
the LORD is pleased to send me, I shall gladly take a tour into
_Wales_.――In this time of retirement, I expect many inward conflicts.
How otherwise shall I be prepared for future mercies? Experience of
GOD’s work upon our own souls, is the best qualification to preach it
effectually to others. In about two months I take another tour round
_America_. The gospel, I believe, will come with power in these parts.
I expect to suffer in the flesh for what hath been done already: But
what have we to do with the consequences of performing our duty? Leave
them to GOD. Oh, my dear brother, pray for me that my faith fail not,
and then I care not what persecution befals

                Your weak unworthy brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXII.

                            _To Mr. H. H._

                                           _Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

WILL this find you in prison or not? Your last letter (which I
received upon my arrival here) gave me some expectations that ere
long you would be both in prison and bonds. By and by, I shall follow
perhaps.――The LORD sanctify all his dispensations to us, and make us
not only willing to be bound, but even to die for the sake of our
dear Master. When I read how my letters, &c. are blessed to your
comfort, it quite confounds me. Oh the free-grace of CHRIST JESUS
our LORD! My dear Brother, let us continue instant in season and out
of season.――Let us continually preach up free-grace, though we die
for it; we cannot lose our lives in a better cause. As I am enabled,
I remember you at the throne of grace; in general I sigh out my
prayers.――But the spirit, I trust, makes intercession for me with
groanings that cannot be uttered.

I have not had much enlargement in preaching, since I have been here;
but my heart is often weighed down, and torn to pieces with a sense
of my desperately wicked and deceitful heart. I can subscribe to what
you say, “Was GOD to leave me to myself, I should be eminent for,
and a ring-leader in sin.” I sometimes think my heart is more vicious
and perverse than any one’s; and yet JESUS CHRIST will come and dwell
in me.――Methinks I hear you say, “Glory be to free grace: All praise
be given to electing love.”――Let all that love the LORD JESUS say,
_Amen_! Pray write to me as often as possible.――GOD, I believe, is
laying a foundation for great things in _Georgia_. I am building a
large house, and taking in many children. Wrestle with GOD in behalf
of, Brother,

                  Your’s eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXIII.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                                           _Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740._

HOW is it with your heart? I hope the LORD JESUS leads you on from
conquering to conquer, and gets himself the victory every day. I
cannot but think that hereafter great things will be done in _America_.
GOD seems to have given some earnests of it already. My next journal
will acquaint you what they are. It often pleases me, to reflect how
CHRIST’s kingdom is securely carried on in spite of men and devils,
and that too by the weakest instruments in different parts of the
world. Surely we shall unite at last, and that glorious time will come,
when, with one heart and with one voice, we shall sing praises to him
who sitteth upon the throne for ever. A glorious epiphany, I trust,
will shortly be made in the hearts of many souls. My dearest Brother,
let us do or suffer any thing, so we may be made instruments of
beginning and carrying on so divine a work. As for my own part, I
often stand astonished at the riches of free distinguishing grace,
and I often feel myself so great a sinner, that I am tempted to think,
nothing can be blessed which comes from such unhallowed hands and lips;
but yet the LORD is with me, and attended his word with mighty power
on _Christmas_ day. Pray remember me to all friends. I expect you will
receive the letters I sent from _Philadelphia_, ere this comes to hand.
I depend on seeing your journal, and hope you will accept of my most
cordial love from, dearest Brother,

                  Your’s eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXIV.

                            _To Mr. H. G._

                                           _Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

WHAT shall I say to your kind letter? I bless the LORD for awakening
you to see the necessity of trusting in a better righteousness than
your own, and I adore him for making use of so mean an instrument as I
am. It is a plain proof that the power is not of man, but of GOD alone.
Labour, dear Sir, to keep up these convictions in your heart. Now GOD
has called you, take care of lying down again.――Be always trimming
your lamp, as though you were in expectation every moment to meet the
heavenly Bridegroom.――Search more and more into the corruption of your
heart, and never rest till GOD’s spirit witnesseth with your spirit,
that you are a child of GOD. Let the deadness of those around you,
excite your zeal. See that you are a burning and a shining light
in the midst of such a crooked and perverse generation.――And let a
sense of GOD’s distinguishing love to you above others, excite you
to distinguish yourself by your obedience; still remembering that the
LORD JESUS is our whole and everlasting righteousness. That we both
may be found in him, is the hearty prayer of

              Your sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLXV.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J――――._

                                          _Savannah, Feb. 29, 1740._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

WITH great pleasure I answer your kind letter, and earnestly pray that
GOD would be pleased to sanctify our correspondence. It rejoices my
soul, when I find a clergyman that loves our LORD JESUS in sincerity.
It is with regret that I speak against any of the sacred function; but
when their preaching and walk are directly contrary to the gospel of
our LORD JESUS, I cannot but speak to them, as well as to the laity.
To the best of my knowledge, I preach the truth as it is in JESUS, and
simply aim at bringing souls to him. Blessed be his free grace for the
success he hath been pleased to give me. Not unto me, not unto me, but
unto his holy name be all the glory! Daily I am convinced, that GOD’s
hand is not shortened――He blesses me here as well as elsewhere. The
Orphan-house is in great forwardness. I feed near an hundred mouths
daily, and am assured I serve a GOD who will supply all our wants.
It would rejoice me to see you at _Savannah_, if your business will
permit.――I can now provide things convenient for your reception.――In
about six weeks I propose, GOD willing, to go northward.――If you
can, pray favour me with your company before that time.――My friends
will rejoice to hear and see you.――They join with me in affectionate
respects to yourself and Mrs. _J――――_. I have sent you a few little
tracts, and long for opportunities to convince you, reverend and dear
Sir, how sincerely I subscribe myself

            Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer
                       in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXVI.

                          _To Captain H. M._

                                          _Savannah, March 2, 1740._
  _Dear Sir_,

WITH pleasure I received your kind letter last night, and immediately
prayed, that GOD would never leave you before he had finished the good
work begun in your heart. He has given you a rational, I hope ere long,
he will give you a _spiritual conviction_ of sin and of CHRIST. When
that comes, all opposition will fall before it. The world will be as
nothing in your eyes, and you will act like a soldier of JESUS CHRIST.
Indeed, dear Sir, I travail as it were in birth, till JESUS CHRIST be
thoroughly formed within you. If I do not forget my promise, I do not
forget your favours.――I make mention of you in my prayers. Linger not,
dear Sir, but haste out of your spiritual Sodom. Flee, flee to JESUS
CHRIST, whose sacred blood has made an atonement for sinners. Lay
hold on his everlasting righteousness, and chuse rather to suffer
affliction with the people of GOD, than to enjoy any thing which this
world may afford, for a season. Accept the sermons I have herewith
sent, and believe me to be, _dear Sir_,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXVII.

                        _To Mr. James S――――._

                                                    _March 2, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. S._,

BLESSED be GOD, that you are yet alive as to your body; blessed be
GOD, that some sparks of divine light are yet discernible in your
soul. Indeed, I have been frequently distressed for you and your
companions, lest satan, through the corruption of your hearts, and the
deceitfulness of worldly business, should get an advantage over you.
Oh watch, my dear friend, watch unto prayer; keep close to GOD through
a living faith in his dear Son; forget not your first love; forget not
a bleeding GOD; forget not _that time_, when your soul was about to
take its last flight. O that I may meet you in triumph at the last
day! Providence thwarts my seeing you. Adieu; write as often as you
can. You have my prayers, and as a token of my love, be pleased to
accept this letter and the books sent with it, from

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXVIII.

                         _To the Hon. J. W._

                                         _Savannah, March 10, 1740._
  _Honoured Sir_,

YESTERDAY, after public worship, I received with pleasure your kind
letter, and was immediately ready to cry out, Why do so many of
my LORD’s servants take notice of such a dead dog as I am. Surely
sovereign, rich, and free grace was never exalted more than in the
mercy shewn to me, who am in truth the unworthiest of the sons of
men.――_Honoured Sir_, it rejoices me to hear that there are so many at
_New England_, who love the LORD JESUS in sincerity, and dare to shine
as lights in the world amongst a crooked and perverse generation.――I
wish they may be all _Aquila_’s and _Priscilla_’s to me, and teach me
the way of GOD more perfectly; for I long to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of my LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST. Oh he is a sweet master;
even here do I feel his blessed influences, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.――He is often with us in the midst of
his sanctuary, and much succeeds the Orphan-house.――I have digged low,
and intend to build it high, because I have a great GOD to pay the
charges. I have about thirty-six children which I maintain and cloath,
and have upwards of forty persons more who are employed in the work.
The plantation is in great forwardness.――Many families are kept here
by my employing them, and I hope to see many a youth bred up for
GOD; for I design to breed up for the ministry, all that at any time
I shall perceive to be renewed by the Holy Ghost, and endued with
suitable natural abilities. The work, I am persuaded, is of GOD, and
I know he will raise up instruments to support it. Let him chuse whom
seemeth him good.――In about three months, GOD willing, I hope to be
near, or at _New England_. I thank you from my soul, honoured Sir,
for your kind invitation; but, I believe, am pre-engaged to one Mr.
_S――――d_. The LORD reward both him, and all others who receive me in
his name! I have not yet received the books, which you was pleased
to send me, because they are sent to the southward, but I expect them
daily, and doubt not of their being profitable. I know not how to
express my gratitude for your great condescension in writing to me,
but that I may always behave so as not to be ashamed of subscribing
myself

                     Your obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXIX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J. W._

                                         _Savannah, March 26, 1740._
  _Honoured Sir_,

SINCE I returned here, I received your letter and journal.――I
thank you for both, and shall wait almost with impatience to see a
continuance of your account of what GOD is doing or has done amongst
you――He knows my heart, I rejoice in whatever GOD has done by your
hands. I, præ, sequar, etsi non passibus equis.

I could now send a particular answer to your last; but, my honoured
friend and brother, for once hearken to a child, who is willing to
wash your feet. I beseech you by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS
our LORD, if you would have my love confirmed towards you; write no
more to me about misrepresentations wherein we differ. To the best of
my knowledge at present, no sin has _dominion_ over me, yet I feel the
strugglings of indwelling sin day by day; I can therefore by no means
come into your interpretation of the passage mentioned in the letter,
and as explained in your preface to Mr. _Halyburton_――The doctrine of
_election_, and the _final perseverance_ of those that are truly in
CHRIST, I am ten thousand times more convinced of, if possible, than
when I saw you last――You think otherwise: why then should we dispute,
when there is no probability of convincing? Will it not in the end
destroy brotherly love, and insensibly take from us that cordial union
and sweetness of soul, which I pray GOD may always subsist between us?
How glad would the enemies of the LORD be to see us divided? How many
would rejoice, should I join and make a party against you? And in one
word, how would the cause of our common master every way suffer by
our raising disputes about particular points of doctrines? _Honoured
Sir_, let us offer salvation freely to all by the blood of JESUS; and
whatever light GOD has communicated to us, let us freely communicate
to others. I have lately read the life of _Luther_, and think it in no
wise to his honour, that the last part of his life was so much taken
up in disputing with _Zuinglius_ and others; who in all probability
equally loved the LORD JESUS, notwithstanding they might differ from
him in other points. Let this, dear Sir, be a caution to us, I hope it
will to me; for by the blessing of GOD, provoke me to it as much as
you please, I do not think ever to enter the lists of controversy with
you on the points wherein we differ. Only I pray to GOD, that the more
you _judge me_, the more I may _love you_, and learn to desire no ones
approbation, but that of my LORD and master JESUS CHRIST.――Ere this
reaches you, I suppose you will hear of my late excursion to _Charles
Town_. A great work I believe is begun there. Enclosed I have sent
you Mr. _Garden’s letters_――They will serve to convince you, more and
more, of the necessity you lie under to be instant in season and out
of season. Oh, dear honoured Sir, I wish you as much success as your
own heart can wish. Was you here, I would weep over you with tears
of love, and tell you what great things GOD hath done for my soul,
since we parted last. Indeed and indeed, I often and heartily pray
for your success in the gospel: May your inward strength and outward
sphere increase day by day! May GOD use you as a choice and singular
instrument of promoting his glory on earth, and may I see you crowned
with an eternal and exceeding weight of glory in the world to come!
This is the hearty desire of, honoured Sir,

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CLXX.

                             _To Mr. W._

                                         _Savannah, March 26, 1740._

AND how does dear Mr. _Wal――_? His letter lies by me, and I now am
inclined to answer it. My dear brother, how do you feel your heart? Is
it grown sick of original and actual sin? Is it grown sick of unbelief
and self-righteousness? Is it closely united to the holy JESUS? Do you
feed on him in your heart by faith? And do you receive of his fulness
day by day? I ask these questions, because I want to see you write
of the inward life, and to hear you talk of your having a feeling
possession of your GOD. For he that believeth aright, hath the witness
within himself. How do the brethren? I hope there is no more saying “I
am of _Paul_,” or “I am of _Apollos_,” but that you are only desirous
of being one in CHRIST. I pray for, though distant from you. I believe
I am preparing a place for many. Our work goes on bravely. I have
near forty little ones now in my house. Some of them I trust will
be effectually wrought upon, and made christians indeed. We all live
in love and unity, and most I hope are seeking after JESUS CHRIST.
He is pleased from time to time to manifest himself to my soul, and
to shew me how unworthy I am of the least mercy. Shortly I shall go
northward, to preach the gospel and collect fresh contributions for my
orphans. GOD has given me an earnest of what he will do in _America_,
by the large collection that was made at _Charles Town_――I live every
day in expectation of hearing from my _London_ friends. My brother,
the captain, refreshed my soul with glad tidings and letters from
_Bristol_. GOD gave me great comfort and satisfaction in conversing
with him, and I hope he will be a christian indeed. Adieu. All salute
you and the brethren.

           I am yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. B. I._

                                        _Savannah, March, 28, 1740._

HOW glad should I be of a letter from dear brother _I――――_? When shall
my soul be refreshed, with hearing that the work of the LORD prospers
in his hand? I suppose before now you have received my letters, and
seen my journal, and I believe GOD is yet preparing great things
for us. Many at _Charles-town_, lately were brought to see their
want of JESUS CHRIST――Next week, GOD willing, I purpose going to
_Philadelphia_, and then perhaps may see _England_ the latter end of
this year, or beginning of the next. The orphan-house goes on bravely.
I have forty children to maintain, besides workmen and assistants――The
great housholder of the world does, and will I am persuaded richly
provide for us all. The colony itself is in a very declining way. But
our extremity is GOD’s opportunity――Our brethren I trust go forwards
in the spiritual life. I have often great inward trials――Pray that
I may be kept in all changes, and seeming chances of this mortal
life. I believe it to be GOD’s will that I should marry. One, who
may be looked upon as a superior, is absolutely necessary for the due
management of affairs. However, I pray GOD, that I may not have a wife,
till I can live as though I had none――You may communicate this to some
of our intimates; for I would call CHRIST and his disciples to the
marriage. If I am deluded, pray that GOD would reveal it to

             Your most affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXII.

                         _To Mr. and Mrs. D._

         _On board the Savannah, bound to Philadelphia from Georgia,
                                                     April 4, 1740._
  _My dear friends_,

SINCE I wrote last, we have buried our Sister _L――――_. _Rachel_ I
left at _Philadelphia_, and sister _T――――_ seems to be in a declining
state; so that sister _A――――_ alone is like to be left of all the
women which came over with me from _England_. I find by experience,
that a mistress is absolutely necessary for the due management of my
increasing family, and to take off some of that care, which at present
lies upon me. Besides, I shall in all probability, at my next return
from _England_, bring more women with me: and I find, unless they are
all truly gracious (or indeed if they are) without a superior, matters
cannot be carried on as becometh the gospel of JESUS CHRIST. It hath
been therefore much impressed upon my heart, that I should marry,
in order to have a help meet for me in the work whereunto our dear
LORD JESUS hath called me. This comes (like _Abraham_’s servant to
_Rebekah_’s relations) to know whether you think your daughter, _Miss
E――――_, is a proper person to engage in such an undertaking? If so;
whether you will be pleased to give me leave to propose marriage unto
her? You need not be afraid of sending me a refusal. For, I bless
GOD, if I know any thing of my own heart, I am free from that foolish
passion, which the world calls LOVE. I write, only because I believe
it is the will of GOD, that I should alter my state; but your denial
will fully convince me, that your daughter is not the person appointed
by GOD for me. He knows my heart; I would not marry but for him, and
in him, for ten thousand worlds.――But I have sometimes thought _Miss
E――――_ would be my help-mate; for she has often been impressed upon my
heart. I should think myself safer in your family, because so many of
you love the LORD JESUS, and consequently would be more watchful over
my precious and immortal soul. After strong crying and tears at the
throne of grace for direction, and after unspeakable troubles with my
own heart, I write this. Be pleased to spread the letter before the
LORD; and if you think this motion to be of him, be pleased to deliver
the inclosed to your daughter――If not, say nothing, only let me know
you disapprove of it, and that shall satisfy, dear Sir and Madam,

              Your obliged friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXIII.

                           _To Miss E――――._

                           _On board the Savannah, April 4th, 1740._

BE not surprised at the contents of this:――The letter sent to your
honoured father and mother will acquaint you with the reasons. Do you
think, you could undergo the fatigues, that must necessarily attend
being joined to one, who is every day liable to be called out to
suffer for the sake of JESUS CHRIST? Can you bear to leave your
father and kindred’s house, and to trust on him, (who feedeth the
young ravens that call upon him) for your own and childrens support,
supposing it should please him to bless you with any? Can you
undertake to help a husband in the charge of a family, consisting
perhaps of a hundred persons? Can you bear the inclemencies of the air
both as to cold and heat in a foreign climate? Can you, when you have
an husband, be as though you had none, and willingly part with him,
even for a long season, when his LORD and master shall call him forth
to preach the gospel, and command him to leave you behind? If after
seeking to GOD for direction, and searching your heart, you can say,
“I can do all those things through CHRIST strengthening me,” what if
you and I were joined together in the LORD, and you came with me at my
return from _England_, to be a help meet for me in the management of
the orphan-house? I have great reason to believe it is the divine will
that I should alter my condition, and have often thought you was the
person appointed for me. I shall still wait on GOD for direction, and
heartily intreat him, that if this motion be not of him, it may come
to nought.――I write thus plainly, because, I trust, I write not from
any other principles but the love of GOD.――I shall make it my business
to call on the LORD JESUS, and would advise you to consult both him
and your friends――For in order to attain a blessing, we should call
both the LORD JESUS and his disciples to the marriage――I much like
the manner of _Isaac_’s marrying with _Rebekah_, and think no marriage
can succeed well, unless both parties concerned are like-minded
with _Tobias_ and his wife――I think I can call the GOD of _Abraham_,
_Isaac_ and _Jacob_, to witness that I desire “to take you my sister
to wife, not for lust, but uprightly;” and therefore I hope he will
mercifully ordain, if it be his blessed will we should be joined
together, that we may walk as _Zachary_ and _Elizabeth_ did, in all
the ordinances of the LORD blameless. I make no great profession
to you, because I believe you think me sincere. The passionate
expressions which carnal courtiers use, I think, ought to be avoided
by those that would marry in the LORD. I can only promise, by the
help of GOD, “to keep my matrimonial vow, and to do what I can towards
helping you forward in the great work of your salvation.” If you
think marriage will be any way prejudicial to your better part, be
so kind as to send me a denial. I would not be a snare to you for the
world. You need not be afraid of speaking your mind. I trust, I love
you only for GOD, and desire to be joined to you only by his command,
and for his sake. With fear and much trembling I write, and shall
patiently tarry the LORD’s leisure, till he is pleased to incline you,
dear Miss _E――――_, to send an answer to

       Your affectionate brother, friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXIV.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                            _On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740._

IT is now full time to answer your letter. You acknowledge me the
first instrument, under GOD (for ever adored be the riches of his free
grace) of awakening you to the divine life: and shall not I endeavour
to quicken and inflame the heavenly spark infused into your soul?
GOD forbid! Oh that my power was equal to my will! How should my dear
brother _H――――_ glow with divine love, and lean by faith on the bosom
of his dearest Redeemer! But I trust ere now you have indeed received
the Holy Ghost, and know what it is to feast on a crucified JESUS.
Does he not, my dear brother, often manifest himself sweetly to your
panting soul? Does he not often teach you the hidden things of the
kingdom of GOD? Does he not tell you that he loves you, and will
suffer nothing to pluck you out of his almighty hand? Thus often is he
pleased to manifest himself to me: and who then dares despair? No; I
can assure the worst, the chief of sinners, that JESUS CHRIST came to
save them. My dear brother, here are glad tidings of great joy! The
fire kindles whilst I am musing. Oh let us call all to come and see
Him, who has forgiven us all the sins that ever we committed. Is not
this the CHRIST? Adieu. My hearty and dearest love to all. Fail not
writing to

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXV.

                           _To Mr. C――――._

                            _On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

YOU, as well as your dear associates, are much upon my heart. I long
to hear that you are advanced in grace, and grown in the knowledge of
CHRIST JESUS your LORD. I say _your Lord_; for I hope, ere now, you
can appropriate CHRIST to yourself, and, without the least diffidence
or doubt, cry out assuredly, “My LORD and my GOD.” When the soul
says this, _then_, but not till then, is it truly married to the dear
LORD JESUS; then are we true children of the bridegroom, and are real
partakers of the supper of the Lamb. This, this is faith: this is
believing; not with the head; not in notion only; but with the heart,
indeed and in truth. The soul now puts its _amen_, and sets the seal
to GOD’s everlasting promises; it now soars upwards towards heavenly
things, and feels continually the invisible realities of another world.
Though sometimes overshadowed by a cloud, yet still it knows that
its Redeemer liveth, and justifieth the ungodly. It cannot doubt of
his favour, though sometimes he is pleased to withdraw his sensible
presence. The root of the matter is twisted round every faculty of the
soul, which daily is supported with this assurance, that CHRIST can
no more forsake the soul he loves, than he can forsake himself. Oh my
dear brother, I find myself much carried out to write of that divine
life, that divine mystery of godliness, the hidden kingdom of GOD in
the heart. If any thing I can say, or do, or write, may be any way
serviceable to dear Mr. _C――――_, it will much rejoice

           His most unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXVI.

                        _To Mr. I―――― B――――._

                            _On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740._
  _My dear, dear Friend_,

I Remember your words that day I took my leave of you, with Dr. _John
S――――_, at _London_. I have not forgotten you, therefore do I now
write a line to my dear Mr. _B――――_. May the Holy Ghost come upon
him, and the power of the Highest overshadow him; and may our glorious
Redeemer never cease striving with him, till he hath a witness within
himself that he is a true child of GOD. Oh, when will you answer the
character of your name-sake and forefather _Isaac_! When, like him,
will my dear friend give himself up a whole burnt-offering unto the
LORD! May I hear that you have recovered your first love, and are, as
formerly, zealous of good works! I think I never yet really doubted
of your return. If prayers to GOD, if entreaties to him, can bring my
dear friend back, he shall not be led away captive by the world; he
shall, he shall be a Christian indeed. I long to see you, and till
then shall wrestle with strong cryings and many tears with my dear
LORD JESUS, in your behalf. I feel, I feel CHRIST’s love; I can no
more doubt of my interest in him, than I can of the shining of the sun
at noon day. He fills, he sweetens and gladdens my soul; he loves me
freely: he will bring me to behold his glory. I think I could now bid
to men and devils defiance. Who is he that condemneth? It is CHRIST
that justifies, who even now sitteth in heaven to make intercession
_for me_. You see, my dear friend, I am upon the mount. I know not how
to stop. It is true, I must come down; but it is only that I may go
up again, and take a view of the heavenly _Canaan_. I am now near
the port whither we are bound: yet a little while, and I shall be in
heaven; and shall I not meet my dear _I――――_ there? GOD forbid! No, no;
I cannot bear the thought of it. Away, my dear, dear brother, to JESUS
CHRIST. Lay hold on his everlasting righteousness: look, look unto
him by faith, and be saved. Call your dear wife to look also. Help,
oh help her in the great work of her salvation; and breed up your dear
child in the nurture and admonition of the LORD. Adieu. My heart is
full. With sincerity I subscribe myself

    Your’s most affectionately in our dearest, dearest LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXVII.

                           _To Mr. N――――._

                            _On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740._
  _My Dear Brother_,

I Have been a few days returned from _Charles-Town_, where our dear
LORD JESUS, I trust, has begun a glorious work. Many came to me under
convictions, and were made to cry out, “What shall we do to be saved?”
The people were exceeding desirous of my return amongst them. If I
call there, as I come northward, it may prevent my being at _New-York_
so soon as was proposed. The LORD direct my going in his way. A
_Fosterian Preacher_ lost ground there. I think you are not much to
be blamed for going out of church; but perhaps it might be better,
on another such occasion, to hear the whole discourse, and then go
and converse with the preacher upon it; otherwise a man may say, you
are angry, and could not judge, because you did not hear all. Praise
is more dangerous than contempt: but when our LORD’s honour can be
promoted by the display of our graces, we need not fear. His grace
will be sufficient for us. I know not what person it is that you would
not have me be so open to, unless it be Mr. ――――. I had rather be too
open than too reserved. Simplicity much becomes the _Israel_ of GOD. A
few days past, with full assurance of faith, I laid the first brick of
our great house: _Jeremiah_ bought land when the people were leading
into captivity. My family daily increase, and, blessed be GOD, as yet
I am kept from doubting. Pray that my faith may never fail. Some of
the _Germans_ in _America_ are holy souls, and deserve the character
they bear. They keep up a close walk with GOD, and are remarkable for
their sweetness and simplicity of behaviour. They talk little, and
think much. Most of them, I believe, are _Lutherans_. But where there
is the image of my dear Master, there are my affections drawn. This is
the catholic spirit you breathe after: the LORD, I am persuaded, will
give it to your soul. All that people do say of me, affects me but
little; because I know worse of myself than they can say concerning
me. My heart is desperately wicked. Was GOD to leave me, I should be a
remarkable sinner. But redeeming love, I believe, will not let us go.
Oh! dear Mr. _N._ pray, and give thanks for me. I daily taste that the
LORD is gracious. All things go on well. My dear brethren salute you,
as does

      Your affectionate, unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXVIII.

                           _To Mr. S――――._

                        _Willingtown, (Pensylvania) April 14, 1740._

READ where I am, and judge whether or not I am a stranger and
pilgrim upon earth. Yesterday, after a short passage of ten days,
did GOD bring us from _Georgia_ to _New-Castle_: there I preached
twice. To-day I shall preach here, and in the evening hope to reach
_Philadelphia_. People are much alarmed already; and great things,
I find, GOD has been pleased to do, by what he enabled me to deliver
when last here. Two ministers have been convinced of their formal
state, notwithstanding they held and preached the doctrines of grace.
One plainly told the congregation he had been deceiving himself and
them, and could not preach any more, but desired the people to pray
with him. Another is as a flame of fire, and hath been much owned of
GOD. An opposer reading my sermon, in order to convince them I did
not preach as Mr. _T――――_, was much disappointed; for power went along
with the sermon, GOD’s spirit fell on the people, and formal opposers
went affrighted away. It is unknown what a glorious stir here is in
the province. Many, very many, I believe, of late have been brought
savingly to believe on the LORD JESUS. The work much increases, and
here is employment for many months: but I must return shortly to
_Savannah_. A primitive spirit revives; and many, I hope, will be
brought to live stedfast in the apostles doctrine, in fellowship, and
breaking of bread, and in prayer. Perhaps dear Mr. _S――――_ may be one
of them. Pray how does that young man do? Is he deeply humbled, and
closely united to the dear LORD JESUS? Does he feel himself a poor
sinner, and daily experience the outgoing and incoming of the blessed
spirit in the sanctuary of his heart? Blessed be GOD, I do: even
whilst I am writing I feel his power. I am persuaded I shall be more
than conqueror over every evil, through my Redeemer’s love. Oh! my
dear friend, keep close to the dear LORD JESUS! Do not go without his
leading, and then you are safe, though in the midst of devils. Adieu.

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXIX.

                          _To Madam C――――._

                                    _New Brunswick, April 27, 1740._
  _Madam_,

ALL things go on well in _America_――nay, better than I dare ask, or
could think. Our LORD’s kingdom comes with power. It is amazing to
see how GOD is present in our assemblies: I refer you to dear brother
_S――――_ for particulars. My animal spirits are exhausted, but I am
filled within. Nature would sometimes cry out, “Spare thyself;” but
when I am offering JESUS to poor sinners, I cannot forbear exerting
all my powers. Oh that I had a thousand lives! my dear LORD JESUS
should have them all. I long to be out of the body, that I may love
and serve him as I would: but I must suffer before I can reign with
him. That you and I may never deny our LORD, is the earnest prayer of,
Madam,

                     Your obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXX.

                           _To Mr. M――――._

                                    _New Brunswick, April 28, 1740._

BLESSED be GOD, I can send you glad tidings of great joy. Our LORD
JESUS is getting himself the victory in these parts. The Orphan-house
affairs go forward beyond expectation. I have upwards of _forty
children_ in my house at _Savannah_, near _seventy persons_ in family,
and upwards of an _hundred people_ to provide for every day. As yet we
want for nothing. The great housholder of mankind gives us all things
richly to enjoy, and, I am persuaded, will provide for us whilst we
trust in him. I had rather live by faith, and depend on GOD for the
support of my great, and yet increasing family, than to have the
largest visible fund in the universe. About five weeks ago the LORD
stirred up the _Charles-Town_ people to contribute upwards of seventy
pounds sterling towards the support of my little ones. A glorious work
was also begun in the hearts of the inhabitants; and many were brought
to cry out, “What shall we do to be saved?” A fortnight ago, after a
short passage of ten days, I landed in _Pensylvania_, and have had the
pleasure of seeing and hearing, that my poor endeavours for promoting
CHRIST’s kingdom, when there last, were not altogether vain in the
LORD. I cannot well tell you how many have come unto me, labouring
under the deepest convictions, and seemingly desirous of finding
rest in JESUS CHRIST. Several have, I humbly hope, actually received
him into their hearts by faith, and have not only righteousness and
peace, but also joy in the Holy Ghost. In short, the word hath run
and been much glorified; and many _Negroes_ also are in a fair way of
being brought home to GOD. I daily receive fresh and most importunate
invitations to preach in all the adjacent countries. GOD is pleased
togive a great blessing to my printed Sermons: they are now in the
hands of thousands in these parts, and are a means, under GOD, of
enlightening and building up many in their most holy faith. Since such
an effectual door is opened for preaching the everlasting gospel, you
will not be surprized if I acquaint you there are many adversaries.
The _Clergy_, I find, are greatly offended at me. The commissary of
_Philadelphia_, having got a little stronger party than when I was
there last, has thrown off the mask, denied me the pulpit, and last
_Sunday_ preached up an _historical faith_, and _justification by
works_. But people only flock the more to me. The power of GOD is
more visible than ever in our assemblies; and more than ever before
are convinced that I preach the doctrine of JESUS CHRIST. Some few
bigotted self-righteous _Quakers_ also, now begin to spit out a little
of the serpent: they cannot bear the doctrine of _original sin_, or of
_imputed righteousness_ as the cause of our acceptance with GOD. One
calls original sin “original nonsense;” and several have been to me,
under the apprehension of being thrust out, for owning and confessing
what I take to be the truth as it is in JESUS. GOD has now brought me
to _New Brunswick_, where I am blessed with the conversation of Mr.
_G―――― T――――_. Indeed he is a good soldier of JESUS CHRIST, and GOD
is pleased in a wonderful manner to own both him and his brethren.
The congregations where they have preached have been surprizingly
convicted and melted down. They are unwearied in doing good, and
go out into the highways and hedges to compel poor sinners to come
in. Yesterday also I heard of two ministers in _Long Island_, near
_New-York_, who had large communications from GOD, and have been
instrumental in bringing many souls to CHRIST. I could add more; but
I must away: the people are waiting for a spiritual meal. They fly
to the doctrine as doves to the windows, and I trust the LORD is now
reviving his work in the midst of the years. With great difficulty
I have redeemed time to send you these few lines. I hope you and the
rest of my dear friends continue to pray for me: for I believe never
was so weak a wretch sent on such an important errand. But when I am
weak, then am I strong. My bodily strength, by frequent journeying
and continued speaking, sometimes fails me; but the LORD quickens
and strengthens me by his mighty power. The more I am opposed, the
more joy I feel; and the first fruits of GOD’s spirit, which he hath
imparted to my soul, are so sweet, that I almost with impatience wait
till I reap a full harvest in the fruition of my GOD. Continue, I
beseech you, to intercede for me; and rest satisfied that both you and
my other _English_ friends are always remembered by

                                Yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXXI.

                           _To W. S. Esq._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 19, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Know very well what it is to part from a friend which is as one’s
own soul; and therefore could in some measure sympathize with you
in what you felt when parting from me. The good LORD sanctify my
friendship to you, and grant we may go hand in hand to heaven. One
of the inclosed papers will shew you the event of what you inserted
(unknown to me) in the News. However, be not disheartened; GOD
shall make even this to work together for your good. The war between
_Michael_ and the dragon has much increased. Mr. _C――――_ has preached
most of his people away from him. He lashed me most bravely the
_Sunday_ before I came away. Mr. _A――――_ also preaches against me. Mr.
_C――――_ did not come to take his leave of me; and Mr. _J――――_ is very
inveterate. Now I believe our LORD’s kingdom will come with power.
At _New-York_ the word ran. Twice or thrice our LORD appeared for
us in a most glorious manner. Mr. _T――――_ and his brethren glow with
divine warmth; and I have conversed with one of the ministers of _Long
Island_, whom GOD has lately sent forth: he is a sweet zealous soul.
Last week, at _Nottingham_ and Mr. _B――――_’s, how did GOD manifest
his glory! We had about twelve thousand hearers; and such a melting,
such a crying, (they say) was scarcely ever seen. Blessed be GOD,
the devil’s children begin to throw off the mask. I want to draw the
lingering battle on. At _Philadelphia_ affairs go on better and better;
only Satan now begins to throw many into fits. I have generally
preached twice and rode near thirty miles a-day since you left me.
The LORD hath been my support, and has often so melted me with a sense
of his free, sovereign, and everlasting love, that some thought I was
giving up the ghost. Oh never let go your sense of GOD’s sovereign,
everlasting love! It is food to my poor soul. Was it not for that,
surely I must sink under the prospect of the labours and sufferings
that are before me. My dear brother, What is the LORD doing in these
parts? I believe the work will go on better here than in _England_.
We are more united in our principles, and do not print one against
another. Pray observe the hint given to _Captain G――――_, and let the
LORD order for me as it shall seem good in his sight. We are now at
_Reedy Island_ waiting for a wind. I heard of a ship going to _Dublin_,
and could not lose the opportunity of writing to my dear brother
_S――――_. I need not remind you to hasten over as fast as possible――Our
LORD has taught you not to stay by the way――I have rebuked Mr. _C――――_
sharply, and I trust have gotten some gracious souls on board――The
LORD is with me; I am somewhat better as to bodily health, but I live
chiefly on inward supplies from above. My master never fails me. Oh
exhort all to fall in love with JESUS, and to pray for,

                    Ever yours in the best bonds,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXII.

                  _To Mr. M――――, an Indian Trader._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 19, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. M――――_,

I Received your letter, and have been reading part of your journal.
I think it your bounden duty to go amongst the _Indians_ again, not
as a _minister_, but as a private christian, whose duty it is, when
converted himself, to strengthen his brethren. An effectual door, I
would hope, is opening amongst some of the heathen. I remember, when
it was first impressed upon me, that I should go to _Georgia_, this
promise came with such power as never will be forgotten, and that too,
long before I had any outward call――“I have made thee the head of the
heathen.”――I speak this for your encouragement, but desire you would
not mention it to others. Who knows but that time may be now near at
hand?――However that be, it is plain GOD calls you, and I wish you good
success in the name of the LORD. Be sure you keep a close walk with
GOD.――Be much in prayer, and prepare for the greatest hardships. Your
greatest perils will be amongst your own countrymen. The heathens will
be stirred up by them, as the Gentiles were by the Jews; but the LORD
JESUS will make you more than conqueror over all. The word of the LORD
will make its own way. Beg of GOD to give you true notions of our free
justification by faith in JESUS CHRIST. Bring your _Indian_ hearers
to believe, before you talk of baptism, or the supper of the LORD.
Otherwise they will catch at a shadow, and neglect the substance.
Improve the leisure you now enjoy, and see that you feel the truths
you speak. Feed on this promise, “It shall be given you in that hour
what you shall say.” Your circumstances call for a fulfilling of
it――Tell them what GOD has been doing here, and how happy JESUS CHRIST
will make them. Be sure tell them, tell them, that true faith is not
merely in the head, but in the heart, and that it will certainly be
productive of good works. Frequently meditate on GOD’s free love to
yourself, and that will best qualify you to speak of it affectionately
to others. I could say more, but time will not permit. Pray for me.
All with me salute you. My poor petitions you may depend on, as the
LORD shall enable me. My love to all, and believe me to be

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXIII.

                      _To the Allegany Indians._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 21, 1740._
  _My Dear Brethren_,

FOR so I call you, because you, and I, and all, have one common father,
ONE GOD, in whom we live, move and have our beings. We all came at
first out of the dust of the earth. For after GOD made the sun, moon,
stars, and every thing you see, he also made a creature called _man_,
and breathed into him the breath of life; he then became a living
soul. He could not only walk and speak, but he could also think, and
reason, and was full of goodness, peace, and joy. This man, this happy
creature GOD placed in a garden, which his own right hand had planted.
He then cast him into a deep sleep, and out of one of his ribs made
what we call a woman, that she might be his wife. Their names were
_Adam_ and _Eve_. With these, GOD made an agreement that they should
eat of every tree of that garden, except one; but if they ate the
fruit of that particular tree, they should die; they should return to
the dust from whence they were taken, lose the comforts they enjoyed
in their souls, and be unhappy for ever in another world. But if they
did not eat this fruit, none of these things should come upon them.
A being, which we call the _devil_, (and who for his pride had been
cast out of heaven) envying their happiness, tempted them to eat the
forbidden fruit. They consented, they ate, they died. Their bodies
became mortal, their souls were deprived of the presence and love of
GOD; and unless a way was found out to make satisfaction for what they
had done, they must have been lost for ever. These were our parents,
and GOD made this agreement with us their children, as well as with
them. For they acted in our name, as a king acts in the name of his
people, or a father in the name of a child――What therefore befel them,
befel us. We died in them; and come into this world poor and miserable,
blind and naked, as they were, when they had eaten of the forbidden
tree. Hence it is, that we are given to lust, anger, envy, hatred,
pride, and malice, and all those troublesome passions which you all
must feel in your own hearts, and cannot but see even in the hearts
of your children. If then, you only look into yourselves, you must
confess these things are so. But GOD hath given us a _book_, wherein
he assures us of the truth of all this:――And we know that book came
from GOD, because none but GOD could tell us the things therein
contained. And I speak first of this, because ’till you feel and
believe this, you cannot come to the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST; and
without the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST you cannot be saved. For after
our first parents, _Adam_ and _Eve_, had taken the forbidden fruit,
and with all their children, thereafter to be born, became guilty
before GOD, GOD out of his own free love sent his only begotten Son
into the world, to die, and so to make an atonement for the sin of
fallen man, and also to obey the law, which man had broken; so that
though fallen man had no righteousness of his own, yet upon believing
in GOD’s Son, he should find a perfect righteousness in him. This Son
is called JESUS, “A Saviour,” because he was to save us from the guilt
and power of our sins. He was truly GOD, and therefore could satisfy;
he was truly man, and therefore could obey and suffer in our stead.
He was GOD and man in one person, that GOD and man might be happy
together again. My dear brethren, (for so I must call you, though
I never saw you) these are strange things. But if you are willing to
learn, the holy spirit shall teach you. For JESUS CHRIST by dying,
and obeying GOD’s law, hath bought for us the holy spirit, who shall
change your corrupt natures, and fit you for happiness hereafter with
the ever-blessed GOD, if you do but believe in your hearts.――Thousands
of white people only believe in their heads, and therefore are no more
christians than those who never heard of JESUS CHRIST at all. They
call CHRIST, “Lord, Lord,” but they do not live as JESUS CHRIST hath
commanded. No, they curse and swear, they break the sabbath, they
get drunk, they play, they whore, they commit adultery, and have
taught many poor _Indians_ to do these abominable things as well as
themselves. Do not you therefore learn of them. For true christians
are sober, chaste and holy. They will not get drunk, they will not
play the whore, they will not cheat, lie, curse or swear; but they
will bless and praise GOD, keep the sabbath, and do all the good they
can; for thus JESUS CHRIST, their LORD and master, lived when he was
here on earth. I say, when he was here on earth; for after he died,
he rose again, and went up into heaven from whence he came, and there
he sits praying for all that shall believe on Him to the end of the
world. For as the world had a beginning, so it also will have an end.
And JESUS CHRIST will come again in the clouds to judge all mankind;
and then he that hath believed in CHRIST, and hath shewn forth his
faith by his works, shall be saved; and he that hath not believed
in CHRIST, shall be damned for ever, and be cast into a lake of fire
and brimstone. But before he comes, he hath promised that the heathen
shall be brought to believe on him, and therefore I write this letter
to you. I would come myself, and preach the glad tidings of salvation
among you, as the bearer of this could interpret for me; but my other
business will not permit. I am a minister of the same JESUS, and once
was as ignorant of Him comparatively as you may be. I once lived like
other people; but the LORD JESUS hath brought me to believe on Him,
and I now do so no more. I once was full of envy, hatred, malice, and
such like cursed tempers; but now I have love, and peace, and joy. And
because JESUS CHRIST hath shewn such mercy to me, I desire that all
others should be made as happy, nay happier than I am myself.――Hearken
therefore now to the voice of the LORD. Pray to GOD that you may feel
yourselves poor, miserable sinners, and come by a living faith to
JESUS CHRIST. Then he will pardon you of all your sins, make you holy
by his spirit here, and take you into everlasting happiness hereafter.
Your traders, some of them at least, will tell you, that you must be
miserable, if you will be christians. But these know nothing of JESUS
CHRIST; for they are ungodly men, walking after their own wicked lusts.
Whosoever will follow JESUS CHRIST, though happy in himself, must
be looked upon as a fool by others. The spirit of the world, and the
spirit of JESUS are quite contrary one to the other; and therefore if
you will live godly in Him, you must suffer persecution; you must have
all manner of evil spoken against you falsely, and be called madmen
and fools; but let not that daunt you, or make you afraid. There is
a world to come, there is a judgment-day, and then JESUS CHRIST shall
crown all those with glory, who have suffered for his name’s sake.
Once more, therefore, hearken to the voice of the LORD. For the LORD
JESUS died for you, as well as for the white men among you, and that
you might be taught the gospel; but they have made you worse than you
were before, and therefore shall receive the greater damnation. He who
brings this, no doubt, will be despised amongst them, because he will,
I hope, neither get drunk, nor curse, nor swear.――But I trust the LORD
will strengthen him, and cause him to shew many of you the true way of
salvation――I shall not fail to pray for him, and for you; for though I
know you not, yet if I could thereby save your precious souls, I think
I could die for your sake. May the LORD JESUS bless you, and bring you
out of darkness into his marvellous light, for his infinite mercy’s
sake. This is the prayer of, dear brethren,

            Your soul’s well-wisher and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXIV.

              _To the Rev. Mr. I――――, at Philadelphia._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 21, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

STILL our LORD is with me both in the ship and on the shore. Adore him
for his free grace. Sailors, I believe, are coming to JESUS. One or
two of our crew are under convictions. The LORD does not keep me here
for nothing. I desire to learn of winds and storms to obey Him. I pray
daily for your success. May the LORD make you a happy instrument of
bringing many sons to glory. Your weakness need not discourage you.
The LORD is pleased to make use of me. He strengthens me mightily in
the inner man. Oh grace, grace! “Less than the least of all,” shall be
my motto still. I need not exhort you to feed the flock of GOD; he has
purchased them with his own blood. Oh admit of a _mixed communion_. I
think the glory of GOD requires this at your hands. May the LORD give
you a right understanding in all things, and enable you to remember

              Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer
                       in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CLXXXV.

                   _To Mr. M――――, at Philadelphia._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 21, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. M._,

AS the LORD is pleased to detain me here by contrary winds, why should
I not send you a line? You have stood up for the truths of GOD, and,
I trust, will not be ashamed of our LORD and his gospel. I expect a
great falling away amongst those that followed me: But I hope dear Mr.
_M._ will continue stedfast and unmoveable to the last. The only way,
is to keep a constant eye to CHRIST, to go forth in his strength, and
never to rest till you feel his blessed truths copied and transcribed
on your heart. You have often heard me exclaim against resting on
a _head-knowledge_. You are a man of strong passions, and sprightly
imagination, and therefore (I know you will not be affronted) you
will make either a great saint, or an accomplished ――――. I believe
the former, though, as a friend, I remind you of, and caution you
against the latter. You love to be dealt plainly with. Oh, dear Sir,
I feel that I love you, and have a real concern for you and your
houshold.――What would I give to see your daughters become wise virgins,
and fallen in love with the blessed JESUS. How amiable would they then
appear! But before this can be done, all pertness, and lightness of
spirit, must be taken away, and they must not only leave off dancing,
but be made new creatures. How is your son? Pray tell him it is time
for him to come home. The fatted calf waits for him. I could say
more; but time will not permit. Dear Sir, pray for me. Indeed I
will endeavour to return the favour; many are waiting for, and would
rejoice at my halting; but the LORD is my helper. He is with me in my
little cabin, and gives me a feeling possession of his blessed spirit.
May the LORD enrich you with a great measure of it, and fill you with
all his fulness! Methinks I see you lifting up your eyes, and saying,
_Amen_.――And so saith, dear Mr. _M._

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXVI.

                   _To Mr. R――――, at Philadelphia._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 22, 1740._
  _Dear R._,

LET nothing said to you in my absence affect you. GOD has lately
delivered you out of one snare; take heed how you fall into another.
If you watch unto prayer, who knows but GOD may bless your endeavours
amongst the poor negro women and children? I could not wish you more
happily situated.――My love to all the society.――Exhort them not to
rest in good desires. Shew them, O shew them the necessity of being
deeply wounded, before they can be capable of healing by JESUS CHRIST.
Bid them to beware of a light behaviour, and light company. Both
do grieve the blessed spirit of GOD. Take heed, take heed of those
accursed snares. I could say more, but time will not permit. My love
to the _Negro Peggy_, and all her black sisters. Bid them to pray
for me. May the blood of JESUS wash away all the pollutions of their
sin-sick souls! What if they were put into a society by themselves,
and you, or some white woman, meet with them? The good LORD direct and
bless you in all things.――This is the hearty prayer of

              Your sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXVII.

                           _To Mr. E――――._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 22, 1740._

GOD only knows when the wind will favour our removal hence; I desire
patiently to tarry the LORD’s leisure, and to wait the moving of the
cloud of his providence. However, in the mean while I send you a line
amongst my other friends. GOD, I believe, hath struck you to the heart,
and shewn you the rottenness of that foundation whereon you was once
building. O keep close to our dear LORD JESUS, and never fear what
men or devils can say of, or do unto you. I am persuaded you must be
buffeted.――You must be persecuted, if you will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS. Let this be your comfort, when the world forsakes you, the
LORD whom you serve, shall take you up. I pray for you, and my other
dear _Philadelphia_ friends daily. The LORD be with you all. Adieu.
You would do well to publish, “that all who have not been baptized
already, and shall appear to be prepared for it, I will, by GOD’s
leave, baptize, at my return to _Philadelphia_.” O that all who
followed me were baptized with the Holy Ghost! But there must be a
falling away.――Dear Mr. _E――――_, I trust, will not desert his LORD.
Trust in his, and not in your own strength, and you shall be safe.
Once more farewel. All with me salute you. The people on shore wait
for me. Remember me in your prayers as

                 Your affectionate servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CLXXXVIII.

            _To the Members of a Society at Philadelphia._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 22, 1740._
  _My dear Friends_,

AS the LORD, for wise reasons, detains me here, I cannot but send
you a line as a token of my unfeigned concern for the welfare of your
better part. I must confess, that the account many of you gave of your
experiences, was not so satisfactory as I could wish; but I hope you
will none of you rest in good desires, or think you are christians,
because you have followed after me. I thank you, GOD knows my heart,
I thank you for all expressions of your love: But I beseech you to
remember, that the kingdom of GOD does not consist in _word_, but
in _power_. Keeping company with GOD’s people, does not give you a
title to the privileges of GOD’s children. It may increase, but not
extenuate your condemnation, if you are not sound in heart, and truly
converted to our dear LORD JESUS CHRIST. I am persuaded you will not
be offended at this plain dealing. GOD has been pleased to work upon
you by my unworthy ministry. I would therefore watch over you for good,
and warn you against those snares which await all the true followers
of the Lamb of GOD. At my next return, I hope I shall see you are
that inwardly, which you would be esteemed outwardly. The searcher of
hearts knows I long for your salvation. My dear friends, adieu. Pray
for me. Be humble, be strong in the LORD and in the power of his might.
A fiery trial awaits you. There is no being a christian without giving
up all for CHRIST. We must all have the spirit of martyrdom, though we
may not all die martyrs.――That the LORD may keep you by his power unto
salvation, and make you more than conquerors through his love, is the
hearty prayer of

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CLXXXIX.

                _To Mr. A―――― S――――, at Philadelphia._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 22, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. S._,

I Desire that you and your wife would accept of these few farewel
lines as a token of my love. My heart’s desire and prayer to GOD is,
that you both may be saved.――Your wife was mourning when I saw her
last. The LORD JESUS prepare her thereby for true, solid, and lasting
comfort! The more we are humbled, the more will the glorious Emmanuel
exalt us; but we must wait his time. JESUS is love, and never corrects
us but for our own good. I find it is always thus with me. I am a
stubborn, ungrateful, disobedient child, and often oblige him to
strike me severely; but love, I find, holds the rod, and therefore his
rod, as well as his staff comforts me. Farewel; the LORD be with you
both!――_John S――――_ and all friends salute you. We live and walk in
love. My tenderest respects await all that truly follow the Lamb. I
beseech you forget not to pray for

           Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXC.

                   _To Mr. G―――― L――――, in London._

                                       _Reedy Island, May 22, 1740._

“ON _Thursday_ last, in the evening, the Rev. Mr. _Whitefield_ went
on board at _New-Castle_, in order to sail to _Georgia_, after having
been on shore thirty-three days, and travelled some hundreds of miles,
and preached fifty-eight times in the provinces of _New-Jersey_,
_New-York_, and _Pensylvania_.――His congregations consisted sometimes
of four, sometimes of five, sometimes of eight, twelve, fifteen, and
once at _Philadelphia_, of _twenty thousand_ people. He had gotten
near five hundred pounds sterling, in money and provisions, for the
Orphan-house at _Georgia_. Great and visible effects followed his
preaching, almost wheresoever he went, especially in _Philadelphia_.
There was never such a general awakening, and concern for the things
of GOD known in _America_ before. He intended to visit _New-England_
soon after his arrival at _Georgia_, and to come by land as far as
_Philadelphia_, at the latter end of the year.”

The above _Advertisement_ may suffice for the present, ’till I have
an opportunity of sending you my journal. That will shew you wonderful
things. I suppose ere this reaches you, our dear brothers, _S――――_
and _G――――_, will be arrived: I have sent a packet of letters to them,
by the way of _Dublin_. I am now waiting for a fair wind, and can say
the LORD is with me of a truth. Several ships are lying by us, and the
captains and their companies come to our ship to prayers. Sailors weep:
It is unknown how many are under conviction. I long to hear what is
doing in _England_. The embargoes, I suppose, prevent your sending;
however my heart is with you. I do not forget you. I hope there is
a door opening among the _Allegany_ Indians. I have read _M――――_’s
journal, and have wrote both to him and them. We have been near a week
at _Reedy Island_: I have preached there five times. The captains and
their crews come constantly to public worship on shore, and to private
prayer in our sloop. We have some with us that love our dear LORD
JESUS in sincerity. My heart is exceedingly drawn towards _Savannah_;
but the LORD’s time is the best. The LORD JESUS bless you all, and
reward you for all kindnesses shewn to his unworthy servant, but

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXCI.

                  _To W―――― S――――, Esq., in London._

                           _Lewis-Town, (Pensylvania) May 24, 1740._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

MY will is much to go to _Georgia_, but my dear LORD JESUS is pleased
to cross me. For ever blessed be his great and glorious name. Just now
the LORD hath brought me hither. Your letter pleased me. I hope our
LORD is now beginning to answer my prayers, and that my dear Brother
_S――――_ is about to know himself. You know I have often told you,
that you ought to suspect your experiences. You have mistaken, in my
opinion, _preparation_, for conversion itself. Your nine years round
of duties, were no effects of the new-birth at all. How could they
be? when you did not know you was to be born again, before you heard
Mr. _C―――― W――――_ expound the seventh chapter of the _Romans_: Then,
but not till then did you begin to be enlightened, and illumination
and conversion are two different things. All my great trials were
consequent on this. Not that GOD’s way of dealing with me, ought
to be a rule for others: But I think your case and mine somewhat
parallel.――Those that have been most humbled, I find, always make the
most solid, useful christians. It stands with reason: The more a man
is emptied of himself, the more room is there made for the spirit of
GOD to dwell in him.――Your caution to dear Mr. _H._ was very good.
Openness is the best preservative of spiritual friendship. I would
behave so, that no one might be afraid to consult me; but if people
will not open their hearts, let them not blame me; I cannot speak,
where I perceive a shyness, and where I see persons are afraid of
me. I am sure they must harbour some ungenerous suspicions or other
against me, and how then can there be a harmony of soul. My dear
brother, my friend, now I have told you my heart: Be not angry, I am
just ready to weep.――Indeed, I am willing to wash your feet, and to
acknowledge all favours under GOD that I have received from you. Be
stable, be willing to consult others that have trod in the spiritual
road before you; do not mistake working _for_ life, for _working from
life_. Watch unto prayer, and do not be carried away by every wind of
doctrine. How could you not see through _L――――_ of _German-Town_? But
I must not chide, but love. Much I owe you; have patience with me and
I will endeavour to pay you. I shall long to see you at _Savannah_.
Once more, my dear friend and brother, adieu. My heart is much melted
down. GOD continually fills me with himself. O give thanks for, dear
Sir,

                 Your brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J. W._

                                         _Cape-Lopen, May 24, 1740._
  _Honoured Sir_,

I Cannot entertain prejudices against your conduct and principles
any longer, without informing you. The more I examine the writings
of the most experienced men, and the experiences of the most
established christians, the more I differ from your notion about not
committing sin, and your denying the doctrines of election, and final
perseverance of the saints. I dread coming to _England_, unless you
are resolved to oppose these truths with less warmth, than when I
was there last. I dread your coming over to _America_; because the
work of GOD is carried on here (and that in a most glorious manner)
by doctrines quite opposite to those you hold. Here are thousands
of GOD’s children, who will not be persuaded out of the privileges
purchased for them by the blood of JESUS. Here are many worthy
experienced ministers, who would oppose your principles to the utmost.
GOD direct me what to do! Sometimes I think it best to stay here,
where we all think and speak the same thing: The work goes on without
divisions, and with more success, because all employed in it are
of one mind. I write not this, _honoured Sir_, from heat of spirit,
but out of love. At present, I think you are entirely inconsistent
with yourself, and therefore do not blame me, if I do not approve of
all that you say. GOD himself, I find, teaches my friends the doctrine
of election. Sister _H――――_ hath lately been convinced of it; and,
if I mistake not, dear and honoured Mr. _W――――_ hereafter will be
convinced also. From my soul I wish you abundant success in the name
of the LORD. I long to hear of your being made a spiritual father
to thousands. Perhaps I may never see you again, ’till we meet
in judgment; then, if not before, you will know, that sovereign,
distinguishing, irresistible grace brought you to heaven. Then will
you know, that GOD loved you with an everlasting love, and therefore
with loving-kindness did he draw you. Honoured Sir, farewel. My
prayers constantly attend both you and your labours. I neglect no
opportunity of writing. My next journal will acquaint you with new
and surprizing wonders. The LORD fills me both in body and soul. I am
supported under the prospect of present and impending trials, with an
assurance of GOD’s loving me to the end; yea, even to all eternity.
Ere this reaches you, I suppose you will hear of my intention to marry.
I am quite as free as a child: If it be GOD’s will, I beseech him to
prevent it. I would not be hindered in my dear LORD’s business for the
world. I am now waiting for a fair wind. GOD blesses the Orphan-house.
Do not be angry with, but pray for, honoured Sir,

             Your unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCIII.

                   _To Mr. S――――, in Charles-Town._

                                           _Savannah, June 7, 1740._
  _Dear Sir_,

BEFORE I knew you by name, my heart was uncommonly affected towards
you. Whenever I saw you at church, I enquired concerning you, and to
my great but pleasing surprize, when I came to your house, found you
was the man I was enquiring after. Your letter gives me still hopes,
that our dear LORD JESUS is about to awaken you from a carnal security
in which you have long lain. He is now calling you, dear, dear Sir. I
beseech you, by the mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS our Saviour, take
heed that you do not lie down again. If you will be a follower of
the Lamb of GOD, you must prepare your soul for manifold temptations;
you must become the song of the drunkard, and have all manner of evil
spoken against you falsely for CHRIST’s sake: But let none of these
things move you, dear Sir. Dare, I beseech you, to be singularly
good.――Be not ashamed of your glory.――Learn a lesson of boldness
even from the devil’s children. How resolute, how daring are they in
their master’s cause? Why should not we be equally courageous in the
cause of JESUS CHRIST? O Sir, I feel a concern for the welfare of your
better part. GOD hath vouchsafed you some convictions; do not rest in
them. Catch not too greedily at comfort. Beg of GOD that you may be
thoroughly wounded, before you desire to be made whole; otherwise you
will go but half way, and be only an unstable, double-minded man at
last. GOD forbid that dear Mr. _S――――_ should ever settle in such a
dangerous state! Ere long I hope to see you in _Charles-Town_, and
then I shall have an opportunity of enquiring more particularly into
the state of your soul. I came home but two days ago, and therefore
could not answer your letter before. If I can be serviceable to you
in any respect, be pleased to command, dear Sir,

                   Your assured friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCIV.

                   _To Mr. J―――― H――――, in London._

                                           _Savannah, June 7, 1740._
  _My dear, dear Brother_,

WITH great comfort I received your long wished-for letter. It warmed
my heart, and knit my soul to you much more than ever. Whenever I
see the child-like simplicity and love of JESUS, it quite melts me
down. Let all former misunderstandings between me and your friends be
entirely forgotten. I always pitied your parents, and most earnestly
prayed for them and you. Blessed be GOD that you are come home. You
are now, I believe, as I always did believe, in your proper station.
May GOD give you a settled habit of devotion, and so fill you with
his spirit, that whilst you are working for GOD on earth, you may be
like those blessed angels, who, though ministring to us, yet do always
behold the face of our Father who is in heaven. My dear brother, let
the love of JESUS constrain you to love him with all your soul. A
sense of his divine love now melts down my heart, and draws tears from
my eyes. O what wonderful things is GOD doing in _America_! _Savannah_
also, _my dear Savannah_, especially my little orphans, now begin to
feel the love of JESUS CHRIST. I arrived here but about two days ago,
in an hour quite unexpected by my friends. How did we weep over one
another for joy! Perhaps I may never feel the like again, till I meet
with the sons of GOD in glory: But oh what a scene was to be seen last
night in the congregation! How did the stately steps of our glorious
Emmanuel appear! His glory shone with exceeding brightness. The power
seemed to be coming on all the day. My soul has been much carried out
in behalf of this place, and now the LORD is about to answer my prayer.
_T―――― D――――_ was yesterday in a glorious agony. I prayed with three
of the girls before I went to church, and their hearts were ready to
break: I prayed also, with strong cryings and tears, with my other
dear friends, and GOD was much with us then; but when we came to
church, oh what was to be seen, and heard, and felt there! The power
of the LORD came as it were upon all. Most of the children, both boys
and girls, cried bitterly, and most of the congregation were drowned
in tears, and mourned as a woman mourneth for her first-born. Expence
of spirits made my body weak, but my soul still wrestled earnestly
with GOD. When I came home, I lay upon my bed; but seeing the children
and people come home crying, I went to prayer again, and a greater
power than ever still attended it. O how was my soul carried out, and
how did the Holy Ghost fill the room! At last I thought proper to
dismiss them; but it would have charmed your heart to hear the little
ones in different parts of the house praying, and begging of JESUS to
take full possession of their hearts. The same power continues to-day:
For near two hours, four or five of the girls have been before the
LORD weeping most bitterly, and under such agonies, as gives me hope
our LORD will soon send them deliverance. I have not yet talked with
the boys, who also have been under great concern, and one especially
in great agonies. I believe two or three will be truly gracious. I
have brought with me a Latin master, and on _Monday_ laid a foundation
in the name of our dear JESUS for an _university_ in _Georgia_. GOD
blesses me (O free and sovereign grace) in every thing I undertake.
Our Orphan-house comes under better regulations every day, and I am
persuaded, in the end, will produce some true followers of JESUS
CHRIST. I am now looking for fresh attacks from the enemy, after such
inroads. He has been busy since my departure, but the LORD hath
vouchsafed to rebuke and disappoint him. My dear brother, may the LORD
be with you! For CHRIST’s sake desire dear Brother _W――――_ to avoid
disputing with me. I think I had rather die, than to see a division
between us; and yet, how can we walk together, if we oppose each
other? Adieu. Dear _James_, with much tenderness I subscribe myself

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CXCV.

                  _To T―――― T――――, Esq., in London._

                                           _Savannah, June 7, 1740._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

I Wrote to you very lately; but your kind letter is now before me,
and I cannot forbear answering it: Blessed be GOD, that you still look
upon me as your friend. May the friend of all, unite us in the best
bonds, and bring us to himself at last! I long to see the son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven. I have now such large incomes from
above, and such precious communications from our dear LORD JESUS,
that my body sometimes can scarcely sustain them. Our dear Brother
_H――――_’s letter (which I desire you may see) will shew you what
a work is begun at _Savannah_. I am in great hopes, that six or
seven boys and girls are really coming to JESUS CHRIST. Dear Brother
_H――――n_ sojourns with us. I love him, and all the brethren, in the
bowels of JESUS CHRIST. I am now looking for some strong attacks from
satan. The LORD comforts me on every side, and lets me see my desire
in the salvation of many souls. O, dear Mr. _T――――_, forget not

           Your weak unworthy friend and brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCVI.

                           _To Mr. M――――._

                                          _Savannah, June 11, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. M――――_,

I Am not uneasy, but rather joyful, to find GOD lets you see more
and more into the misery of your depraved nature. I pray GOD, these
convictions may still increase, and that you may not fall short of a
saving union with JESUS CHRIST. I am concerned to find you have lost
a sense of your first love.――Take heed, my dear friend, and wrestle
with your dear LORD, till he lets you see the root of bitterness that
must certainly be in some corner of your heart. Perhaps you have not
renounced the world and your own righteousness, and then no wonder our
LORD doth not manifest himself to your soul. Sometimes, indeed, GOD
withdraws on purpose to wean us from sensible devotion, and to take
us off from seeking any self-complacence in our duties. If this be the
case of you and your friends, you are patiently to tarry the LORD’s
leisure, and to continue striving with all your might till he is
pleased to lift up the light of his blessed countenance upon you. You
must seek JESUS though it be sorrowing, and then, after three days,
you will find him; for the LORD will not always be chiding, neither
keepeth he his anger for ever. That GOD may daily renew you in the
spirit of your mind, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,

              Your assured friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCVII.

                   _To Mr. W―――― W――――, in London._

                                          _Savannah, June 11, 1740._
  _Dear W――――_,

I Am sorry to hear, that you and your masters cannot agree; but
this I know, supposing the case to be as you represent it, you must
notwithstanding “be obedient, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward.”――Rough usage will do you good, if you are
sincere; GOD sees the pride and stubbornness of your heart, and
therefore sends you these trials to beat it down: I find the benefit
of crosses. What should I do without them? Dear brother _S――――_ would
write to you, I believe, but is much engaged.――We love one another in
the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. O, dear _W._ keep close to GOD, and see
you are that inwardly, which you would be esteemed outwardly.――Rest in
nothing short of a sound and thorough conversion. That GOD may bless
you, and all the brethren, with all spiritual blessings, is the hearty
prayer of

                   Your assured friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CXCVIII.

             _To the Rev. Mr. J―――― B――――, at New-York._

                                          _Savannah, June 13, 1740._
  _Reverend and dear Brother_,

I Have just been reading the three letters you sent some time ago to
our dear brother _N――――_, and find my heart much inclined to write
you a line. Whatever others may do, yet I am far from judging you on
account of GOD’s dealings with your soul. I rather rejoice in them,
having myself been blessed with many experiences of the like nature.
But, my dear brother, if GOD works upon us in an extraordinary manner,
we must prepare for temptation, even from our christian brethren.

Most judge of others from what has passed within themselves; and many
of the dear children of GOD are too apt to confine GOD to this or
that particular way of acting; whereas he is a sovereign agent: his
sacred spirit bloweth when, and where, and how it listeth; and when
an uncommon work is to be done, no doubt he will work upon his chosen
instruments in an uncommon manner. What the event of the present
general awakening will be, I know not. I desire to follow my dear
LORD blindfold, whithersoever he is pleased to lead me; and to do just
so much, and no more, as his providence points out to me. Wonderful
things have been done ever since my arrival at _Savannah_: Such an
awakening among little children, I never saw before. Our dear brother
_N――――_’s letter will acquaint you with particulars. O my dear brother,
how ought such manifestations of GOD’s glory, to quicken our souls,
and excite us to lay out ourselves more and more in the service of
the best of Masters, JESUS CHRIST! Every day he fills me with himself,
and sometimes brings me even upon the confines of eternity. Methinks
I often stand upon _Mount Pisgah_, and take a view of the heavenly
_Canaan_, and then long to be gathered to my people: but, my dear
brother, both you and I must suffer, and that great things, before we
enter into glory. My work is scarce begun; my trials are yet to come.
What is a little scourge of the tongue? What is a thrusting out of the
synagogues? The time of temptation will be, when we are thrust into
an inner prison, and feel the iron entering even into our souls. Then,
perhaps, even GOD’s people may be permitted to forsake us for a while,
and none but the LORD JESUS to stand by us. “But if thou, O dearest
Redeemer! wilt strengthen me in the inner man, let enemies plunge
me into a fiery furnace, or throw me into a den of lions.” My dear
brother, my heart is enlarged towards you: though I never saw, yet
I love you most tenderly. How does dear brother _D――――_? Does he yet
walk in the light of GOD’s countenance? Pray salute him lovingly in
my name. In the fall, I hope to see you in _Long Island_, and to be
somewhat filled with your company. In the mean while, let us all keep
a close walk with JESUS; and be pleased, in an especial manner, to
remember

     Your unworthy, though affectionate brother, fellow-labourer,
                   and servant in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CXCIX.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J. W._

                                          _Savannah, June 25, 1740._
  _My honoured Friend and Brother_,

I Thank you for, and heartily say _amen_ to all the petitions you have
put up in my behalf. I want to be as my Master would have me; I mean,
meek and lowly in heart. Dear Sir, bear with me a little longer; pray
for me with great earnestness; and who knows but my GOD may give me to
abhor myself in dust and ashes! He that hath given us his Son, will he
not with him freely give us all things? For CHRIST’s sake, if possible,
dear Sir, never speak against election in your sermons: no one can
say that I ever mentioned it in public discourses, whatever my private
sentiments may be. For CHRIST’s sake, let us not be divided amongst
ourselves: nothing will so much prevent a division as your being
silent on this head. I should have rejoiced at the sight of your
Journal. I long to sing a hymn of praise for what GOD has done for
your soul. I am glad to hear that you speak up for an attendance
on the means of grace, and do not encourage persons who run (I am
persuaded) before they are called. The work of GOD will suffer much
by such imprudence. I trust you will still persist in field-preaching.
Others are strangers to our call. I know infinite good hath been done
by it already, and greater good will yet be done thereby every day:
but we must be judged of our brethren. May GOD bless you more and more
every day, and cause you to triumph in every place. Next _Monday_,
GOD willing, I go to _Charles-Town_. My family is well regulated;
but I want some more gracious assistants. I have near an hundred and
thirty to maintain daily, without any fund. The LORD gives me a full
undisturbed confidence in his power and goodness. Dear Sir, adieu. I
can write no more; my heart is full. I want to be a little child. O
continue to pray for

       Your most unworthy, but affectionate brother and servant
                    in our dear LORD JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                              LETTER CC.

                        _To Mr. J―――― H――――._

                                          _Savannah, June 25, 1740._
  _Dearest J――――_,

EVERY letter you write, knits my heart more and more to you in the
bowels of JESUS CHRIST. Your last I received on _Saturday_. GOD had
been preparing me for it, by a week’s intimation upon my heart, and by
an inexpressible agony in my soul just before it came to hand. Blessed
be GOD that our friends preach up poverty of spirit, for that is the
only foundation whereon to build solid abiding comfort. The stony
ground received the word with joy; but how did those hearers stand
in a day of temptation? They fell away; for it is very possible that
the heart may have much joy floating on the top of it, and yet be as
hard as the nether millstone. Hence it is that so many, who boast of
rest in their flashes of joy, are self-willed, impatient of reproof,
despisers of others in a mourning state, and wise in their own
conceits: whereas the believer, that hath been with his LORD in the
wilderness, and has a truly broken and contrite heart, though his joy
may not be so extravagant, yet it is substantial. Such a soul hangs
upon GOD; thinks before he speaks; and is continually hearkening for
what the LORD will say to him, by the small still voice of his spirit.
This is the state I want all our friends to arrive at. I cannot see
how they can, with assurance, talk of their enjoying solid fellowship
with the Father, and his dear Son CHRIST JESUS. I shall not be
surprized if many, who seemingly began in the spirit, do end in
the flesh, and turn persecutors of the doctrines and disciples of
JESUS CHRIST. How can they possibly stand, who never felt themselves
condemned criminals? who were never truly burthened with a sense not
only of their actual, but original sin, especially that damning sin
of unbelief? who were never brought to see and heartily confess, that
after they had done all, GOD might, notwithstanding, deny them mercy;
and that it is owing merely to his sovereign love in CHRIST JESUS our
LORD, that they can have any hopes of being delivered from the wrath
to come? It is for preaching in this manner that I like Mess. _T――――s_.
They wound deep before they heal; they know that there is no promise
made but to him that believeth; and therefore they are careful not
to comfort over much those that are convicted. I fear I have been too
incautious in this respect, and have often given comfort too soon. The
LORD pardon me for what is past, and teach me more rightly to divide
the word of truth for the future. Dearest _J――――_, pardon this freedom;
I am constrained to write in this manner. I thank you most heartily
for your historical letter. Fail not writing to me often. Dearest
_J――――_, help me by your prayers: for CHRIST’s sake help me. Our LORD
is yet with us. I hear different accounts of things; but I pray for
all, and suspend my judgment till you see

                Your affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCI.

                        _To Mrs. E―――― C――――._

                                          _Savannah, June 25, 1740._
  _My dear Sister_,

YOUR letter afforded me much inward pleasure. Surely it bespeaks the
writer not to be far from the kingdom of GOD. You was then waiting
for our LORD’s salvation: ere now, I trust, CHRIST hath manifested his
glory, filled you with his blessed spirit, and thereby sealed you to
the day of redemption. ’Tis good to be long in an humbled state: it
is the best preparation for solid, lasting comfort. Blessed are they
that mourn most, for they shall be the most comforted: not that we are
violently to keep ourselves in such a state; but when GOD’s hand lies
heavy upon us, we are patiently to tarry the LORD’s leisure, till he
reveals himself to our souls. I was a mourner a long while; but, glory
be to GOD! I have for some years been almost continually comforted;
at least kept from doubting of my interest in JESUS CHRIST. I can with
an humble boldness cry out, “My LORD and my GOD!” He daily manifests
himself to my soul, and causes me to feel my dependance on his free
grace and sovereign love. This is the kingdom of GOD within us.
O, my dear sister, what would I give, were all the world partakers
of this unspeakable gift! I long, I burn with an ardent zeal after
the salvation of my dear brethren, who are dead in trespasses and
sins. Poor souls! Why am I taken, and they left? O the sovereign,
free, unmerited, distinguishing love of my and your JESUS! My dear
sister, let us love him, let us obey him; let us suffer for him with
a chearful heart! His love will sweeten every cup, though never so
bitter. Let us pledge him willingly, and continue faithful even unto
death. A scene of sufferings lies before us. Who knows but we may wade
to our Saviour through a sea of blood? I expect (O pray that I may be
strengthened if called to it) to die for his great name’s sake. ’Twill
be sweet to wear a martyr’s crown. Dear Madam, adieu. I remember GOD’s
goodness to us at _Broad-Oaks_. I pray for you and yours. I trust your
daughters keep close to JESUS. Salute them kindly in my name. Read my
Journal, and give hearty thanks for

          Your unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCII.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. S――――, in London._

                                          _Savannah, June 26, 1740._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

AND is one of the priests also obedient to the word? Blessed be GOD,
the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who hath translated you from
darkness to light; from the power of Satan to the service of the
ever-living GOD. Now know I, that our glorious _Emmanuel_ has not
commanded us to pray in vain. Surely we shall never taste of death,
till we see our dear LORD’s kingdom coming with greater power. He
seems to be thrusting out more labourers into his harvest. Glory be
to his free grace that you are one of the happy number. O dear Sir,
rejoice and be exceeding glad; and let the love of JESUS constrain you
to go out into the highways and hedges to compel poor sinners to come
in. Some (even that are true lovers of the Lamb) may say “this is not
proceeding with a zeal according to knowledge:” but I am persuaded,
when the power of religion revives, the gospel must be propagated in
the same manner as it was first established, “_itinerant preaching_.”
Go on, dear Sir, go on, and follow your glorious Master without the
camp, bearing his sacred reproach. Never fear the scourge of the
tongue, or the threatnings that are daily breathed out against the
LORD, and against his CHRIST. Suffer we must, I believe, and that
great things. Our LORD, by his providence, begins to shew it. Ere
long, perhaps, we may sing in a prison, and have our feet set fast
in the stocks. But faith in JESUS turns a prison into a palace, and
makes a bed of flames become a bed of down. Let us be faithful to-day,
and our LORD will support us to-morrow. O dear Sir, though I know you
not, yet my heart is enlarged towards you, and I make mention of your
name in my prayers. I pray GOD to give you strength to bear the heat
and burden of every day, and to enable you to preach with such wisdom,
that all your adversaries may not be able to gainsay or resist.
Blessed be his holy name, I drink deep of his love every moment. A
greater power than ever attends my poor labours; and several of my own
houshold, both boys and girls, I really believe, are coming savingly
to JESUS CHRIST. I am now about to go to _Charles-Town_; a work of
GOD is begun there. Who knows but I may see my dear brother _S――――_
in _America_? But future things belong to GOD; to his grace and love I
commend you. Keep close to your dear JESUS, and pray that a child-like,
humble spirit, may be given to

              Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCIII.

                   _To Wm. S――――, Esq., in London._

                                          _Savannah, June 26, 1740._
  _My dear Brother S――――_,

I Sent you a packet of letters from _Charles-Town_, the middle of this
month. Since that time, I have received many agreeable letters from
_England_; but find from _Blendon letters_ that Miss _E―――― D――――_
is in a seeking state only. Surely that will not do; I would have one
that is full of faith and the Holy Ghost. Just now I have been weeping,
and much carried out in prayer before the LORD. My poor family gives
me more concern than every thing else put together. I want a _gracious
woman_ that is dead to every thing but JESUS, and is qualified to
govern children, and direct persons of her own sex. Such a one would
help, and not retard me in my dear LORD’s work. I wait upon the
LORD every moment; I hang upon my JESUS: and he is so infinitely
condescending, that he daily grants me fresh tokens of his love, and
assures me that he will not permit me to fall by the hands of a woman.
I am almost tempted to wish I had never undertook the orphan-house. At
other times, I am willing to contrive matters so that I may not marry:
but I am always checked; and looking back upon the workings of my
heart in this affair, I am more and more convinced that it is of GOD;
and therefore know he will order affairs for me, as will best promote
his own glory. So that my dear LORD’s honour does not suffer, I care
not what trouble in the flesh I undergo. His glory, to the best of my
knowledge, is my only aim, in my thoughts, words, and actions. My
dearest brother, adieu. By this time, I trust, you are near _England_.
Dear brother _S――――_ goes with me to _Charles-Town_. Brother _B――――_
keeps house in my absence. Take heed that the people you bring believe
on JESUS. Expect to hear shortly again from

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCIV.

                        _To Mr. W―――― D――――._

                                          _Savannah, June 28, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Thank you for your kind letters and friendly cautions; and trust
shall always reckon those my choicest friends, who, in simplicity and
meekness, tell me the corruptions of my heart. It is that faithfulness
which hath endeared _J―――― S――――_ to me. I think I never was obliged
to any one so much before: for that reason also I find my heart knit
to you. O my dear brother, still continue faithful to my soul: do not
hate me in your heart; in any wise reprove me. Exhort all my dear
brethren to forgive my past (I fear) too imperious carriage; and let
them pray that I may know myself to be what I really am, less than
the least of them all. I have abundant reason to bless GOD for sending
me abroad. I cannot say I have improved my retirement as I ought; but
I can say it hath been highly beneficial to my soul. I have a garden
near at hand, where I go particularly to meet and talk with my GOD,
at the cool of every day. I often sit in silence, offering my soul as
so much clay, to be stamped just as my heavenly potter pleases: and
whilst I am musing, I am often filled as it were with the fulness of
GOD. I am frequently at _Calvary_, and frequently on _Mount Tabor_;
but always assured of my LORD’s everlasting love. O continue to pray
for me, that I may know myself even as I am known. I want to have a
proper mixture of the lion and the lamb, of the serpent and the dove.
I do not despair of attaining it. JESUS is love; JESUS willeth my
perfection; JESUS hath died for me; JESUS can deny me nothing. He hath
given me himself; will he not then freely give me all things besides?
I wait for thy compleat salvation, O LORD! My dear brother, my heart
is now enlarged. Your prayer is answered. The whole Godhead now fills
my soul. O grace, grace! O Jesu, Jesu! was ever love like thine! LORD,
I abhor myself in dust and ashes. O that I could praise thee! that
I could love thee as I ought! My dear brother, I hear you have been
zealous for the LORD your GOD since my departure. You have done well:
you never can be zealous for a better master: but why, silent? why
withdrawn? Did you go before you was called or qualified? If so,
you have done right: but I suspend my judgment; for I find there is
no judging at a distance. I only pray GOD that you may always feel
yourself a very poor sinner, and find refuge in the wounds and blood
of the Lamb. I rejoice to hear the work of GOD goes on, and heartily
wish you may not be divided among yourselves. Our dear LORD is with us
here: I only want a few more gracious, solid assistants. The LORD will
send them in his due time to

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCV.

                          _To J―――― B――――._

                         _Good Hope, (South-Carolina) July 2, 1740._

  _My dear Brother B――――_,

IS it true, that one night whilst you was expounding, you told your
hearers, from your own experience, that “they could not go on without
throwing aside the means of grace?” or words to that purpose? If
so, I pity you; for you are not only misled yourself, but are also
misguiding others. But this is no more than I expected. I think you
begun to teach too soon, and before you had a commission given you
from above. Brother _J――――_ was of the same opinion, before I left
_England_. For that reason, I would not take you to _Georgia_. Blessed
be GOD, I have no such over-forward spirits there. My dear _B――――_, I
write in love. For CHRIST’s sake try your spirit: I fear you was never
yet truly humbled. I know you have had joy; but I always thought it
was joy floating on the surface of an unmortified heart. From such
a joy, good LORD deliver us! O that you had been in the wilderness a
little longer! then you might have been an experienced teacher; but
I fear you are now only a novice. May the LORD keep you from falling
into the condemnation of the devil. I write not this to damp, but to
regulate your spirit; if you are humble, you will take it kind. GOD
knows, I wish all the LORD’s servants were prophets; but I would not
have my Master’s work suffer by a too heady way of proceeding. Why
should you dishonour him by acting above your sphere; whereas you
might honour him by acting in it. Every one is not fit to be a public
expounder. To build up awakened sinners in private, is what is more
wanted at present than young unexperienced preachers. But I have done;
I fear I have offended my brother: forgive me this wrong. As GOD was
pleased first to work upon you by my ministry, you must always expect
to be watched over by

            Your affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCVI.

                                      _Charles-Town, July 11, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. R――――_,

YOUR letter much rejoiced me. O that you may still follow on, till
you truly know the LORD! I shall be glad to have you for a scribe,
if you are well instructed in the things which belong to the kingdom
of heaven. Keep close, my dear friend, keep close to the dear Mr.
_T――――s_: under GOD, they will build you up in your most holy faith.
It gladdens my heart to hear of their success in the LORD. The
LORD increase them more and more, and multiply the number of their
spiritual children! I suppose brother _G――――_’s letter informed you
what a speedy passage the LORD gave us, and how we were received at
_Georgia_. Surely I shall never see the like again, till I meet the
sons of GOD in glory. Praise the LORD, O my soul! my dear friend, help
me to praise the LORD. I have been here above a week. The LORD hath
been pleased to work on many hearts. On _Sunday_ the _commissary_
denied me the sacrament; but my dear Master fed me, notwithstanding,
with the bread which cometh down from heaven. Persecution seems to
be coming on more and more. My dear friend, see that you are rooted
and grounded in love and faith; or how will you stand fast in a dying
hour? With difficulty I write this before morning service. I preach
generally, in town or country, twice a-day. The heat is great; but
the LORD enables me to bear the burden of it. Next month, GOD willing,
I go to _New-England_, and hope to see _Philadelphia_ in _November_.
On _Tuesday_ next I am cited to appear before the commissary and his
court in a judicial way: the event I leave to my dear LORD JESUS. O
dear Mr. _R――――_, let not the cross keep you from JESUS. If we suffer,
we shall reign with him. Salute your honoured mother in my name, and
all that love our dear LORD in sincerity, from, dear Mr. _R――――_,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCVII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― R――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, July 15, 1740._
  _Dear J――――_,

MAY you answer your name, be freely gracious, and filled with as much
love as he was, who leaned on the sacred bosom of our dear Redeemer. I
believe GOD has begun; if so, GOD will carry on the good work in your
heart. It is the LORD’s doing. Not unto me, not unto me; but to free,
rich, distinguishing, sovereign grace, be all the glory! The wearing
off, or forgetting your convictions formerly, ought to make you more
jealous of yourself now. The more you see the enmity of the heart, the
better: you cannot then avoid abhorring yourself in dust and ashes.
I rejoice you have been at _Neshamini_. I can say of Mr. _T――――_ and
their brethren, as _David_ did of _Goliah_’s sword, “None like them.”
I am glad you and my friend _R――――_ are acquainted. O see that you
keep one another warm, and be zealous for the LORD your GOD. I wonder
not at your master’s insinuations. Indeed, dear _J――――_, you must
be tried thoroughly, if you would approve yourself to the glorious
_Emmanuel_. Exhort all to die for him, rather than deny him in any
wise. I find my suffering time at hand: but my dear LORD comforts me
with his gracious and refreshing presence. A good work is carrying on
here: let my dear friends help it forwards by their prayers. My love
to all at the society; and accept of the same from

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCVIII.

                   _To Mr. B――――, in Pensylvania._

                                      _Charles-Town, July 18, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

PRAISE the LORD, O my soul! Our glorious _Emmanuel_ seems to have
girt his sword upon his thigh, and to be riding on from conquering to
conquer. He gets himself the victory in _Philadelphia_. He is getting
himself the victory in _Charles-Town_ also. Indeed a glorious work is
begun, and carrying on here. Many souls are awakened to a sense of the
divine life.――The alteration in the people since I came here at first,
is surprizing. I preach twice a day, generally, either in town or in
the villages around. The commissary shoots out his arrows, even bitter
words. He hath denied me the sacrament, and cited me to appear before
him and his court; I was obliged to appeal home. O my dear brother,
pray that I may be humble and of a child-like spirit. Every day GOD
shews me fresh instances of his love. Here are some faithful ministers
amongst the baptists. One of them, Mr. _C――――_, has wrote to you; pray
answer him. Some time next month I hope to be at _New England_, and to
return to you according to promise. Be pleased to salute the brethren
in my name. Indeed I honour and love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST.
O that I was worthy of your acquaintance! But I am not. All that I can
say is, that I will endeavour to approve myself

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCIX.

                          _To Mr. I. R――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, July 18, 1740._
  _My Dear Friend_,

I Thank you for going with friend _E――――_ and _B――――_ to _Nazareth_.
May GOD bless you, and cause great good to come to that place!
GOD seems to be carrying on as great a work in _Charles-Town_,
comparatively speaking, as in _Philadelphia_. Surely our LORD intends
to set the world in a flame. O that the holy fire of his divine love
was kindled in every heart! Be pleased to read what I have sent to
Mr. _N――――_. If you please you may print that extract, which I sent
from my journal: GOD willing, I hope to be at _New England_ by the
beginning of _September_, and to be refreshed with your and my dear
friend’s letters. Indeed, I love you all in the bowels of my dear LORD
JESUS. Do not let us forsake him. Let us not be ashamed of him, though
we live in a crooked and perverse generation. I thank my dear friends
for their zeal in building a house;¹ but desire it may not have any
particular name, or be put to any particular use, till my return
to _Philadelphia_. I wish them good luck in the name of the LORD.
Last night I appeared a third time in a public court; but they not
accepting my _Recusatio judicis_, I appealed home; so that now I have
free liberty to embark when providence pleaseth. O my dear friend,
think of a bleeding, dying LORD. Keep close to him, and exhort all
friends to pray and give thanks for

                   Your assured friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._

  ¹ This is now the college at _Philadelphia_.


                             LETTER CCX.

                        _To Mr. G―――― L――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, July 18, 1740._
  _Dear Brother L――――_,

GOD will work, and who shall hinder? The sacrament hath been refused
to me, and I have appeared thrice in open court, before the commissary
and some of his clergy; but our LORD rides on, from conquering
to conquer. Many, I believe, are really pricked to the heart. The
commissary’s detaining me here, has much tended to the furtherance of
the gospel. I put in my exceptions against his sitting as my judge,
and they were repelled; so that I have appealed home, and all other
proceedings here are stopped. By this means I shall have liberty
to preach the gospel without further interruption, and my call to
_England_ will be more clear. The enclosed paper will shew you what
is doing in _Philadelphia_. Private letters received from thence last
night and this morning, have much refreshed my heart. Many souls are
flocking to the LORD JESUS. I need not exhort you to praise the LORD.
You may advertise what paragraphs you think proper, only add that
_Philadelphia_ people are building a house for me to preach in, 106
feet long and 74 feet wide. The LORD is bringing mighty things to
pass. I am surprizingly strengthened to bear the heat and burden of
every day. My dear LORD never leaves nor forsakes me, but works by
my unworthy ministry more and more. O that I was humble! O that I
was a little, little child! I know not how soon I may be called to
_England_. The inhabitants here are wondrous kind. They attend morning
and evening most chearfully on my preaching. We often see the stately
steps of our dear LORD in his sanctuary. I am more than happy. I am
amazed at the divine goodness. LORD, I abhor myself in dust and ashes!
See the wonders of the LORD; help us to praise him. Excuse me to all
my dear friends. For this fortnight past I have not wrote a word of my
journal. My sermons, &c. are bought off exceedingly, northward. O pray
that an humble child-like spirit may be given to

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCXI.

                     _To the Reverend Mr. D――――._

                                        _Savannah, August 15, 1740._
  _My dear Brother D――――_,

OUR dear LORD (after being pleased to bring me low by bodily sickness)
now gives me liberty to write to you. Whilst I am writing, I find
my heart united with yours. I hope we have both drank into the same
spirit, and are both instances of the same sovereign, distinguishing,
everlasting love. O let us extol it! O let us improve daily! And
since GOD sees fit that we shall not die, but live, let us lay
ourselves out to declare the works of the LORD. I am ashamed of my
past unfruitfulness. Had others received the stock, that hath been
intrusted to me, how would they have improved it? Indeed I am an
unprofitable servant. In the righteousness of JESUS my LORD, is my
only refuge. Well may GOD afflict me; I richly deserve it; and when he
brings me low, nothing grieves me so much, as to think that I should
be so froward as to oblige the GOD of love to strike me with his rod.
But oh the goodness of the LORD! His rod, as well as staff, do comfort
and build up my soul. I would not but be tried for ten thousand
worlds. Blessed be GOD, I am enabled to clasp the cross, and desire
to glory in nothing more. Dear brother, help me with your prayers. Our
victorious JESUS makes his power to be known; many have I seen struck
quite down by the power of the word. The holy Ghost hath often come
like a mighty rushing wind. Satan has desired to sift us as wheat. But
our LORD still shews me, that the orphan-house will go on and flourish.
It is often a great weight upon my soul; but through your and my dear
friends prayers, the LORD I am persuaded will still support it.

                   Yours eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXII.

                     _To Mr. N――――, in New York._

                                          _Savannah, Aug. 15, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

YOUR letter rejoiced my heart. May our dear lord’s kingdom be advanced
more and more every day! O that I may meet you at _New-England_!
Blessed be GOD that Mr. _M――――_ is yet alive. Salute him from me; I
hope to see him before I die, and so be taught the way of GOD more
perfectly. I thank you for your kind hints; I have always paid great
deference to dear Mr. _N――――_’s judgment: indeed I love him in the
bowels of JESUS. GOD has been pleased to bring me low, for some time,
by inward weakness, and faintness of spirits. The first strength that
is given me to write, I make use of in writing to you. The LORD is
purging me, that I may bring forth more fruit. I long to die, not that
I may be rid of crosses, but that I may be with CHRIST. He draws me
more and more to him every day. I have had many close domestic trials
of late. But these words, “David strengthened himself in the LORD
his GOD,” came with sweet power to my soul. I find, the nearer I come
to CHRIST, the closer my trials are. I have been sometimes through
weakness kept from preaching; but when I have spoken, the word has
come with power. I have reason to think, that three persons who came
to see the orphan-house, have been effectually called by our LORD
JESUS. I have now some _Carolina_ visitors in my house; two of them,
I believe, are coming truly to JESUS.――The word runs like lightning in
_Charles-Town_. A serious lively Baptist minister, named _Tilly_, is
here also; he has preached often for me, and last _Sunday_ received
the sacrament in our way.――O bigotry, thou art tumbling down a-pace!
Blessed be GOD.――Next week, GOD willing, I embark for _Charles-Town_,
shall stay there a few days, and from thence purpose going to
_New-England_. GOD wonderfully provides for my orphans.――I am kept
from every degree of doubting; nay, the LORD fills me daily with a
full assurance of faith. He chastens and corrects me, but it is all
in love. O help me to praise him, and thereby add to the obligations
already laid on, dear Mr. _N――――_,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXIII.

                           _To Mrs. L――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, Aug. 22, 1740._
  _Honoured Mother_,

ALTHOUGH I had not the pleasure of receiving one line, either from
your dear self, or from any other of my beloved friends; yet my
heart was rejoiced just now by a sailor, who told me, that he saw and
conversed with you the twenty-ninth of _May_ last. I thank you for the
salutation sent to me by him. Indeed I thank you from my very heart:
for I feel myself unworthy of your notice. Every day I love and honour
you more and more; and when you come to judgment, GOD will shew you
how many tears I have shed in secret for you and my dear sister. O let
them not be in vain! _Honoured Mother_, fly to JESUS.――Behold, with
open arms, yonder he stands, ready to embrace you, if you feel your
misery, and are willing to come to him to find rest. May the great GOD,
who only can govern the wills and affections of sinful men, make you
willing in the day of his power! Yesterday GOD brought me hither again.
In a few days, I hope to embark for _New-England_; thence, GOD willing,
you may expect another letter. For near six weeks past I have been
under great weakness of body; but notwithstanding have been enabled
sometimes to preach with great power. I am now somewhat better, but,
without a miracle, cannot think of being long below. Indeed, _honoured
Mother_, I every day long to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST. Pray
tell Mr. _W――――_, that Mr. _H――――_, and _I―――― B――――_, with one or two
more of their relations, I believe, are effectually called of GOD. We
had much power at _Savannah_. GOD hath sent me some family trials; but
all things are working for good. I am, honoured Mother,

                        Your ever dutiful son,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXIV.

                  _To the Reverend Mr. J―――― W――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, Aug. 25, 1740._
  _Dear and Honoured Sir_,

LAST night I had the pleasure of receiving an extract of your
journal.――This morning I took a walk and read it. I pray GOD to give
it his blessing. Many things I trust will prove beneficial, especially
the account of yourself. Only, give me leave with all humility to
exhort you not to be strenuous in opposing the doctrines of _election_
and _final perseverance_, when, by your own confession, “you have not
the witness of the spirit within yourself,” and consequently are not a
proper judge. I remember dear brother _E――――_ told me one day, that
“he was convinced of the perseverance of the saints.” I told him, you
was not. He replied, but he will be convinced when he hath got the
spirit himself. I am assured, GOD has now for some years given me this
living witness in my soul. I cannot say, I have since indulged any
doubts (at least for no considerable time) about the forgiveness of my
sins; nay, I can scarce say, that I ever doubted at all. When I have
been nearest death, my evidences have been the clearest. I can say, I
have been on the borders of _Canaan_, and do every day, nay, almost
every moment, long for the appearing of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; not to
evade sufferings, but with a single desire to see his blessed face.
I feel his blessed spirit daily filling my soul and body, as plain
as I feel the air which I breathe, or the food I eat.――Perhaps the
doctrines of election and of final perseverance hath been abused, (and
what doctrine has not,) but notwithstanding, it is children’s bread,
and ought not in my opinion to be with-held from them, supposing it
is always mentioned with proper cautions against the abuse. _Dear_ and
_Honoured Sir_, I write not this to enter into disputation. I hope, at
this time, I feel something of the meekness and gentleness of CHRIST.
I cannot bear the thoughts of opposing you: but how can I avoid it,
if you go about (as your brother _C――――_ once said) to drive _John
Calvin_ out of _Bristol_. Alas, I never read any thing that _Calvin_
wrote; my doctrines I had from CHRIST and his apostles; I was taught
them of GOD; and as GOD was pleased to send me out first, and to
enlighten me first, so I think he still continues to do it. My
business seems to be chiefly in planting; if GOD send you to water, I
praise his name.――I wish you a thousand-fold increase. I find, by young
_W――――_’s letter, there is disputing among you about _election_, and
_perfection_.――I pray GOD to put a stop to it, for what good end will
it answer?――I wish I knew your principles fully; did you write oftner,
and more frankly, it might have a better effect than silence and
reserve. I have lately had many domestic trials, and that about points
of doctrine, not by myself, but from others in my absence. I daily
wait upon GOD, depending on his promise, that all things, even this,
shall work together for my good. Many in _Charles-Town_, I believe,
are called of GOD. You may now find a christian, without searching the
town as with a candle. Mr. _G――――_ is less furious, at least in public.
He hath expended all his strength, and finds he cannot prevail. Adieu,
_Honoured Sir_, Adieu! My health is better, since I last left _Charles
Town_, and am now freed from domestic cares. With almost tears of love
to you, and the brethren, do I subscribe myself, honoured Sir,

        Your most affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCXV.

                  _To Mrs. J―――― L――――, in Bristol._

                                      _Charles-Town, Aug. 26, 1740._
  _Dear J――――_,

I Hope you and your little society go on and prosper. I hear there are
divisions among you. Avoid them if possible. The doctrines of election,
and of final perseverance, I hold as well as you.――But then, they
are not to be contended for with heat and passion. Such a proceeding
will only prejudice the cause you would defend. Pray shew this to your
other friends.――Exhort them to avoid all clamour, and evil speaking,
and with meekness receive the ingrafted word which is able to save
your soul. GOD has begun a great work here, and in other parts
of _America_; but yet, I believe, I shall shortly have a call to
_England_. O pray it may be the divine will, that I may have a
prosperous journey; and that you may see me grown in grace, and in
the knowledge of our LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST.――With tenderest
love to all, I am

                Your affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXVI.

          _To the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Edmund Lord
                          Bishop of London_.

          _On board the Savannah, bound from Charles-Town to Boston,
                                                September ――, 1740._
  _My Lord_,

ALTHOUGH your Lordship has been pleased to caution the people against
running into those extremes, to which your Lordship apprehended my
doctrine would lead men; yet I am persuaded that will not any way
influence your Lordship, as to the contents of this letter. The one
single point which it contains, is this query, “Whether the commissary
of _South-Carolina_ has power given him from your Lordship, to
exercise any _judicial authority_ against me, or any other clergyman,
who doth not belong to his province?” The reason of my putting this
question, I suppose your Lordship will be apprized of, before this
reaches your Lordship’s hands. I have been lately cited to appear
in an ecclesiastical court, erected by the _Reverend_ Mr. _G――――_,
for not reading the common prayer in the meeting-house, which I was
obliged to preach in at _Charles-Town_, (unless I would be silent)
because the commissary would not let me have the use of his church.
I appeared, and have appealed, according to law, to four of his
majesty’s commissioners for reviewing appeals, to know, whether the
commissary ought not to have accepted a _Recusatio judicis_, which I
lodged in court. This, I suppose, they will determine. I only desire
your Lordship’s explicit opinion and determination, whether Mr.
_G――――_, (supposing he hath power over his own clergy,) has authority
to erect such a court to arraign me, who belong to the province of
_Georgia_. The bearer hereof will give me your Lordship’s answer. In
favouring me with which, your Lordship will oblige, my Lord,

              Your Lordship’s obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXVII.

                           _To Mr. P――――._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 19, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Have just now read your kind letter. Blessed be the LORD, for
imparting somewhat of his divine presence to your soul. O may he fill
you brimful, and enable you so to preach, that all your adversaries
may not be able to gainsay or resist. Never fear undertaking to preach
without notes; remember the promise, “Lo I am with you always, even to
the end of the world.” By my master’s leave, I propose to preach with
you, and dear brother _W――――_. I am a worm and no man: I deserve to
be the outcast of the people. On _Sunday_ I arrived at _Rhode-Island_.
Our LORD called some. Yesterday I came hither, to-day I preached.
May the LORD give a divine increase to the seed sown! A great work
is carrying on at _Charles-Town_. The spirit of GOD is moving in
different parts of the world. O my dear, dear brother, let us up and
be doing, and the LORD will be with us. The world is lying in the
wicked one. May GOD make you instrumental to deliver thousands from
his cursed slavery! With difficulty I redeem time to write this.
Brother _B――――_, and _B――――_, are with me. I will endeavour to give
you notice of my coming. In the mean while, cease not praying for

                   Your weak and unworthy brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXVIII.

                     _To Mr. N――――, at New-York._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 23, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

HITHER GOD brought me on _Thursday_ evening: I preached once on
_Friday_, and twice every day since. The power of the LORD advances
sweetly. Our LORD, I believe, will revive his work in the midst of the
years; he enables me to preach plainly. Some ministers, I hope, will
be quickened, as well as people. They attend, and are exceeding civil,
as also the governor. I wrote to you from _Rhode Island_; I shall call
there, as I come to you. On _Monday_, GOD willing, I shall set out to
see Mr. _M――――_, and on _Monday_ fortnight hope to go to _Northampton_.
All the packets of letters came safe. GOD bless my dear, dear Brother
_N――――_ for his great care. Friends from _England_ write strange
things; GOD, I believe, calls me thither. Mr. _W――――_ and the _M――――s_,
I think, are sadly erroneous in some points of doctrine. When I see
you, I will communicate many particulars; now, I have scarce time
to write this. Our dear LORD sweetly fills me with his presence.
My heaven is begun indeed. I feast on the fatted calf. The LORD
strengthens me mightily in the inner man. I find a few souls left
in _Sardis_ that have not defiled their garments. Excuse me to Mr.
_P――――_; I have not time to answer his kind letter! Adieu; I hope to
be with you in about five weeks.――I pray for dear Brother _T――――_,
that he may espouse more souls to the LORD JESUS CHRIST.――My hearty
love to all.

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXIX.

                           _To Mr. A――――._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 23, 1740._
  _My dear Brother A――――_,

I Thank you for your letter: May the LORD enable me to send you an
answer of peace. _Sinless perfection_, I think, is unattainable in
this life. Shew me a man that could ever justly say, “I am perfect.”
It is enough if we can say so, when we bow down our heads and give up
the ghost. _Indwelling sin_ remains till death, even in the regenerate,
as the article of the church expresses it.――There is no man that
liveth and sinneth not in thought, word, and deed: However, to affirm
such a thing as perfection, and to deny _final perseverance_, what an
absurdity is this? To be incapable of sinning, and capable of being
finally damned, is a contradiction in terms. From such doctrine may I
ever turn away! Labour, dear Mr. _A._ to be holy, even as GOD is holy;
but do not look for complete perfection here below. What is this, but
in effect to vacate the righteousness of CHRIST? I hear many amongst
you who begun in the spirit, are now ending in the flesh. CHRIST hath
freely justified them, _i. e._ entitled them to all his merits, and
yet they must do so and so to keep themselves in a justified state.
Alas, this is sorry divinity; I have not so learned CHRIST. No, his
gifts and callings are without repentance. Whom he loves, he loves to
the end. Work I will, but not to keep myself in a justified state. My
LORD hath secured that; but I will work to shew my gratitude for his
putting me into a justified state. O that all would study the covenant
of grace. Dear Mr. _A._ I feel that I love you, and I find myself
carried out to write in this manner. My LORD blesses me with all
spiritual blessings; he causes me to rejoice in his salvation. I pray
him to carry on his work in _London_, and to keep his church from
errors; but there must be a sifting as well as a gathering time. It is
meet that such offences should come. All shall work together for good
to those who are _called after GOD’s purpose_: They shall finally be
saved. This much comforts, dear Brother _A――――_,

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCXX.

                         _To H. H. in Wales._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 24, 1740._

AND is dear Brother _H. H._ yet alive in body and soul? Blessed be GOD,
who causes those that wait on him to renew their strength. I rejoice
in your success: May you mount with wings like eagles, walk and not be
weary, run and not be faint! You shall not be taken or hurt, till the
appointed hour is come. I hope your conversation was blessed to dear
Mr. _W._ O that the LORD may batter down his free-will, and compel
him to own his sovereignty and everlasting love! Some of _F―――― Lane_
society, I fear, are running into sad errors; but this happens for
our trial, especially mine. Those that before, I suppose, would have
plucked out their eyes for me, now I suspect, I shall see very shy,
and avoiding me. This is my comfort, the LORD is a never-failing
friend; his truth will make its way in spite of all carnal reasoning.
O pray for me that I may have the spirit of judgment and a sound mind.
My coming to _England_ will try my fidelity to my Master: Nothing
but his strength can enable me to hear all contradictions with
meekness, and to preach with love his everlasting truths. O that
all would study the covenant of grace! The more I look into it, the
more is my soul delighted. Dear Brother _H._ adieu. My dear friend
_J. S._ sits by and cordially salutes you. I hope you have received
my letters. I expect to hear from you by dear Brother _S._ GOD is
working powerfully in _America_. He fills me with his presence, and
causes me to go on my way rejoicing. Grace! grace! I greet all most
affectionately, and am, dear Brother _H._

                           Yours eternally,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J. W._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 25, 1740._
  _Honoured Sir_,

THIS is sent in answer to your letter dated _March 25_.――I think,
I have for some time known what it is to have righteousness, peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. These, I believe, are the privileges of
the sons of GOD: But I cannot say I am free from indwelling sin; no,
I find a law in my members warring against the law of my mind: This
makes me to cry out, even now, “Who shall deliver me from the body
of this death?” I thank GOD, our LORD JESUS CHRIST will. I cannot
see wherein the heterodoxy of the article of our church doth consist,
which says, “That this corruption remains even in the regenerate;”
and if that after conversion we cannot sin in thought, word or deed,
I do not know why our LORD taught us to pray to our heavenly Father,
“Forgive us our trespasses.” I am sorry, honoured Sir, to hear by
many letters, that you seem to own a _sinless perfection_ in this life
attainable. I think I cannot answer you better, than a venerable old
minister in these parts answered a Quaker. “Bring me a man that hath
really arrived to this, and I will pay his expences, let him come
from where he will.” I know not what you may think, I do not expect
to say indwelling sin is finished and destroyed in me, till I bow down
my head and give up the ghost. There must be some _Amalekites_ left
in the _Israelites_ land, to keep his soul in action, to keep him
humble, and to drive him continually to JESUS CHRIST for pardon and
forgiveness. I know many abuse this doctrine, and perhaps wilfully
indulge sin, or do not aspire after holiness, because no man is
perfect in this life. But what of that? must I therefore assert
doctrines contrary to the gospel? GOD forbid. Whether the seventh
to the _Romans_, is applicable to a converted person (as many very
eminent saints have thought) is not at all to the purpose: There
are other passages of scripture, which plainly shew that sinless
perfection is not attainable here below. Such as these, “There is no
man that liveth and sinneth not.” “In many things we offend all.” And
I know no sin except the sin against the Holy Ghost, of which a child
of GOD may not be guilty, if GOD should withdraw his grace.

Whatever you may think of _David_, the scripture says, “He was a
man after GOD’s own heart;” yet how did he fall? And if you will not
permit _Peter_ to have been converted when he denied his Master; what
will you say to St. _Paul_? Did not he sin, do you think, (at least
were not his passions irregular, and what is that but sin) when he
spoke to the High Priest, and called him whited wall? Besides, dear
Sir, what a fond conceit is it to cry up _perfection_, and yet cry
down the doctrine of _final perseverance_? But this, and many other
absurdities you will run into, because you will not own _Election_:
And you will not own Election, because you cannot own it without
believing the doctrine of _Reprobation_. What then is there in
reprobation so horrid? I see no blasphemy in holding that doctrine,
if rightly explained. If GOD might have passed by all, he may pass by
some. Judge whether it is not a greater blasphemy to say, “CHRIST died
for souls now in hell.” Surely, dear Sir, you do not believe there
will be a general _gaol delivery_ of damned souls hereafter. O that
you would study the covenant of grace! O that you were truly convinced
of sin, and brought to the foot of sovereign grace! _Elisha Cole on
GOD’s sovereignty_, and _Veritas Redux_, written by Doctor _Edwards_,
are well worth your reading. But I have done; if you think so meanly
of _Bunyan_, and the Puritan writers, I do not wonder that you think
me wrong. I find your sermon has had its expected success; it hath
set the nation a disputing; you will have enough to do now to answer
pamphlets; two I have already seen. O that you would be more cautious
in casting lots! O that you would not be too rash and precipitant!
If you go on thus, _honoured Sir_, how can I concur with you? It is
impossible; I must speak what I know.――Thus I write out of the fulness
of my heart: I feel myself to be a vile sinner.――I look to CHRIST; I
mourn because I have pierced him. Honoured Sir, pray for me. The LORD
be with your dear soul. About Spring you may expect to see,

                     Ever, ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXII.

                        _To Mr. G―――― L――――._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 26, 1740._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

I Wrote to you about a month ago from _Charles-Town_.――Since I came
here I have received two letters from you. May the great GOD of heaven
and earth bless your dear soul for thus assisting his poor unworthy
servant: A sense of my ingratitude almost melts me into a flood
of tears.――Indeed I am the very chief of sinners.――O the love, the
sovereign, distinguishing, everlasting love of GOD my Saviour! Praise
him, praise him, dear Mr. _L――――_, with all your soul.――I hope nothing
will cause a division between me and Messrs. _W――――s_: But I must
speak what I know, and confute error wheresoever I find it. About
Spring I hope to come over if the LORD will.――Be pleased to inform my
friends, that last _Sunday_ was sevennight I arrived at _Rhode-Island_,
where I preached and read prayers in the church on _Monday_ and
_Tuesday_ to very large and affected auditories.――On _Wednesday_ I
preached at _Bristol_, in my way to _Boston_.――On _Thursday_ night I
got there, and on _Friday_ preached, and have preached once or twice
every day since.――Almost all the ministers, and vast bodies of people,
have been continually pressing to hear the word of GOD, sometimes in
the fields, and sometimes in the meeting-houses. My health is much
restored by the coolness of the air.――I intend staying about a month
in these parts, then to go to _Philadelphia_ by land, from thence to
_Georgia_ by water, and I hope to embark for _England_ the beginning
of the Spring.――You see by this, dear friend, how our LORD works
by my unworthy hands. Ministers and people, I believe, will be much
quickened.――I hope your dear soul prospers. For CHRIST’s sake avoid
disputing; study your heart and the scriptures; get nearer and nearer
to CHRIST, he will lead you into all truth. My most tender love to all;
if opportunity any way offers, every letter received shall be answered
by, dear dear Mr. _L――――_,

              The meanest of all your christian friends,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXIII.

                           _To Mr. I――――._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 26, 1740._
  _My dear Brother, I――――_,

I Thank you for your kind letter. It is the first I have received
from you since I left _England_.――I bless GOD the work goes on in
_Yorkshire_.――May our glorious, sin-forgiving LORD bless you and your
spiritual children more and more! I find, our friends are got into
deputing one with another.――O that the GOD of peace may put a stop to
it! I wish many may not be building on a false foundation, and rest in
a false peace. They own _free justification_, and yet seem to think,
that their continuance in a justified state depends on their doings,
and their wills.――This, I think, is establishing a righteousness
of our own. My dear brother, if we search the scriptures, we shall
find that the word _justified_ implies not only pardon of sin, but
also all its consequences.――“Thus (says Saint _Paul_) those whom
he justified, them he also glorified;” so that if a man was once
justified, he remains so to all eternity.――Here lies the anchor of
all my hopes.――Our LORD having once loved me, he will love me to
the end.――This fills me with joy unspeakable and full of glory.――I
now walk by faith.――I work not to keep myself in a justified state,
(for men or devils can never pluck me out of CHRIST’s hands,) but to
express my love and gratitude for what JESUS hath done for my soul.
This, I think, is what the apostle calls “faith working by love.”
My dear brother, my heart’s desire and prayer to GOD is, that we may
all think and speak the same things.――For, if we are divided among
ourselves, what an advantage will satan get over us? Let us love one
another, excite all to come to CHRIST without exception, and our LORD
will shew us, who are his. The work of GOD goes on exceedingly in
_America_. The LORD is pleased to manifest himself unto my soul more
and more. I am a naughty, stubborn child; but my dear LORD will have
mercy because he will have mercy. It is owing to his distinguishing
love that I am not hardened. Here is, and I believe will be a great
quickning in these parts.――The cloud seems to be moving. Perhaps in
the Spring we may meet face to face. With difficulty I get time to
write this, but I must answer dear Brother _I――――_’s letter.――May
the LORD JESUS be continually with your spirit, and make your soul
brimful of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. I love you in the bowels
of the crucified Lamb. May he unite us more and more intimately
to his dear self, and to one another. Salute all that love him in
sincerity.――Brethren, pray for us.――That you may be kept by GOD’s
power to eternal salvation, is the prayer of

         Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother and
                     poor weak servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXIV.

                        _To Mr. W―――― D――――._

                                       _Boston, September 28, 1740._
  _Dear Brother W――――_,

I Thank you for your kind letter from _Osset_; I wish it was written
with more life. I fear you are turning almost to a spirit of bondage:
but it is good for you to be sifted, to make an experienced minister
of JESUS CHRIST. I could not but smile, to find you wink at the
_decency of my dress_. Alas! my brother, I have known long since what
it is to be in that state you are (in my opinion) about to enter into.
I myself thought once that christianity required me to go nasty. I
neglected myself as much as you would have me, for above a twelvemonth:
but when GOD gave me the spirit of adoption, I then dressed _decently_,
as you call it, out of principle: and I am more and more convinced,
that the LORD would have me act, in that respect, as I do. But I am
almost ashamed to mention any such thing: rather let us talk and write
of the love of JESUS; “Let us stand fast in the liberty wherewith
JESUS CHRIST hath made us free, and not be again entangled in a yoke
of bondage.” GOD only knows whether you have done right in leaving
the university, or in declining to exhort. If you do not preach till
you are perfectly free from all sin, I believe you will never preach
again. I could never hear of such a minister or christian yet. My dear
brother, I speak freely to you, because I love you in the bowels of
JESUS CHRIST. He sent his disciples to preach before they were perfect;
nay, when they were weak in grace. Exercise the talents you have,
and that is the way to get more. Thus has GOD dealt with me for these
seven years. “To him that hath, shall be given.” Many of our friends
talk against election: a good reason may be given. I believe they have
never taken pains to search into the true state of the case. What if
some abuse that doctrine; is it therefore false? No; by no means. I am
persuaded, if any of our friends would examine their experiences, they
would find that JESUS CHRIST freely prevented them by his grace; that
he compelled them to come in; and that it is not owing to themselves,
but to the will and promise of GOD, that they are now kept in a state
of grace. But I will say no more. My dear brother, I love you. May the
LORD lead you into all truth. Our dear Master is doing wonders among
us. Praise him lustily, and with a good courage. Adieu. Dear _J――――
S――――_ salutes you and the brethren, as does

                        Yours affectionately,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXV.

                    _To the Rev. Mr. Z―――― M――――._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 28, 1740._
  _Reverend and dear Brother_,

I Received――I felt your letter. Surely there is a sympathy between
souls that have drank into the same spirit. GOD willing, I purpose to
come and see you; and will endeavour to send you timely notice: but oh
do not expect too great things from me; for if you do, who knows but
my LORD may desert me; and then what am I? Excuse the brevity of this.
So many persons come to me under convictions, and for advice, that I
have scarce time to eat bread. Wonderful things are doing here. The
word runs like lightning. _Dagon_ daily falls before the ark. I know
you will, in spirit, pray that a due sense of his own vileness may be
continually given to

       Your affectionate, though unworthy, brother and servant
                     in our glorious _Emmanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXVI.

                     _To Mr. W――――, at Bristol._

                                           _Boston, Sept. 28, 1740._
  _Dear Brother W――――_,

WHAT mean you by disputing in all your letters? May GOD give you to
know yourself, and then you will not plead for _absolute perfection_;
or call the doctrine of election a “doctrine of devils.” My dear
brother, take heed; see you are in CHRIST a new creature. Beware of
a false peace: strive to enter in at the strait gate; and give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. Remember you are but
a babe in CHRIST, if so much. Be humble, talk little, think and pray
much. Let GOD teach you, and he will lead you into all truth. I love
you heartily: I pray you may be kept from error, both in principle
and practice. Salute all the brethren. If you must dispute, stay till
you are master of your subject; otherwise you will hurt the cause you
would defend. Study to adorn the gospel of our LORD in all things; and
forget not to pray for

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXVII.

                        _To Mr. G―――― L――――._

                                          _Boston, October 9, 1740._
  _My dear Brother L――――_,

I Write to you again by this ship, though I have scarce time to write
a line. GOD works by me, I think, more than ever. I am quite well in
bodily health. Ministers as well as people are stirred up, and the
government is exceeding civil. In short, GOD is doing greater things
than can be expressed. Oh exhort all to pray, and to give thanks for
me with their whole hearts. The bearer brings the authentic copy of my
appeal; I sent you another copy before from _Carolina_. Be pleased to
keep this I have now sent, till you hear of my coming to _England_:
if I come in the Spring, I will lodge it myself; if not, be pleased to
lodge it for me, and I will pay all expences. O dear brother _L――――_,
what a scene of labours and sufferings lies before me! My dear JESUS
will make me more than conqueror over all: he strengthens and comforts,
he converses with me by night and by day: he gives me all peace and
joy in believing. I pray GOD to keep our dear brother _S――――_ and
others from a false stillness. I am sorry to hear such errors are
risen amongst the brethren. Adieu; the LORD be with your spirit. I
have already collected upwards of four hundred pounds sterling for the
Orphan-house. GOD shews me that _America_ must be my place for action.
Once more adieu. Cease not to pray for,

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXVIII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― H――――._

                                          _Newhaven, Oct. 24, 1740._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

YOUR letter, just now brought to me by dear brother _N――――_, gave
me great comfort. With fear and trembling, ever since the late
disputations, have I opened letters sent from _Savannah_, but blessed
be GOD, our dear LORD is with my dear friend _H――――_. Blessed be GOD,
my family dwell together in unity. The GOD of love fill you with all
peace and joy in believing. I hope a supply for your then present
wants, came to you soon after you sent your letters: since that, I
have sent from _Boston_ 100 _l._ sterling; next week I hope to send
again from _New-York_, and before _Christmas_ I trust I shall see you
face to face. Wonderful things GOD does for me. I am enabled to preach
and travel better than ever. There has been joy in heaven, I believe,
over many souls repenting. There are some hopes of dear, dear brother
_N――――_’s coming with me. Mr. _B――――_, one of the young ministers of
_Long Island_, with his wife, accompanies me also; and another settled
christian, who holds and experiences the truth as it is in JESUS.
O that all my family may be thus minded! I suppose by this time you
know how matters are determined for me, if Mr. _C――――_ is arrived. GOD
keeps me in suspense: suspense did I say? Blessed be his holy name,
I am quite easy: I am persuaded he will chuse for me a daughter of
_Abraham_. I know not but it may be the divine will that you should
abide in _Georgia_, whilst I go to _England_. Be resigned: see if GOD
does not bring all things about for your good: there is but little
comfort to be expected in _England_. I find I must, if I am faithful,
oppose the errors of many who, I believe, fear GOD: O that I may do it
with meekness and wisdom. Methinks I now long to be with you all at
_Savannah_. Pray for my speedy passage. I am glad GOD is scourging out
the children of _Belial_: you have often heard me say GOD would do so.
Never fear; a remnant will be left, which shall take root downwards,
and bear fruit upwards, and yet fill the land. My dear brother, adieu:
I am called away. I love you more solidly than ever. Dear _J――――
S――――_, Mr. _F――――_, and _P――――_, love you too: we travel very
comfortably: thousands of prayers are continually put up for me and
mine. My love to all, without exception. Feed the lambs, study the
purity of their hearts, and thereby rejoice the soul of

       Yours most affectionately and eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXIX.

                        _To Mr. J―――― W――――._

                                       _Philadelphia, Nov. 9, 1740._
  _Dear and honoured Sir_,

I Received your’s, dated _March 11_, this afternoon. Oh that we were
of one mind: for I am yet persuaded you greatly err. You have set a
mark you will never arrive at, till you come to glory. I think few
enjoy such continued manifestations of GOD’s presence as I do, and
have done, for some years; but I dare not pretend to say I shall be
absolutely perfect. O, dear Sir, many of GOD’s children are grieved
at your principles; O that GOD may give you a sight of his free,
sovereign, and electing love! But no more of this: why will you compel
me to write thus? why will you dispute? I am willing to go with you
to prison, and to death; but I am not willing to oppose you. My heart
is now much affected: indeed I love and honour you. Dear, dear Sir,
study the covenant of grace, that you may be consistent with yourself:
hasten O LORD, the blessed time! I fancy I shall embark for _England_
about Spring; but am not yet determined. GOD shews me his goodness
plenteously every day. I dwell in CHRIST, and CHRIST in me: glory
be to sovereign grace. I seem to have a new body, and the LORD
JESUS greatly enriches my soul. O I am a poor sinner! but our LORD
frequently manifests himself in such a manner, that it throws me into
an agony which my body is almost too weak to bear. Honoured Sir, adieu.
O build up, but do not lead into error, the souls once committed to
the charge of

           Your affectionate, unworthy brother and servant,
                         in the loving JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXX.

                   _To Mr. H―――― H――――, in Wales._

                                       _Philadelphia, Nov. 9, 1740._
  _My very dear Brother H――――_,

I Wrote to you from _Boston_. Your letter, written near a twelvemonth
ago, came to my hand this afternoon. My soul is knit to you: we both
speak and think the same things. The LORD be with your spirit. JESUS
manifests forth his glory daily in these parts. Though I am such a
vile, worthless, ungrateful wretch, yet the LORD fills me out of his
divine fulness day by day. His word is like a fire, and a hammer: last
week I saw many quite struck down. Our LORD is working upon little
children. _America_, ere long, will be famous for christians. Surely
the candlestick will shortly be removed from _England_. Little did I
think, when Mr. _E―――― J――――_ wrote, that I should preach in all the
chief places of _America_: but that is now done; glory be to rich,
free, and sovereign grace! Perhaps about Spring I may embark for my
native country: the LORD vouchsafe us a happy meeting. O _Wales_, thou
art dear to my soul! My love to all the brethren. Dear brother _H――――_,
I pray GOD you may prosper, even as your soul prospers. Expect another
journal shortly: but wait till we come to glory, fully to see and hear
what GOD hath done for

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXXI.

        _To his Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esq., in Boston._

                                       _Philadelphia, Nov. 9, 1740._

THOUGH late, I now snatch a few moments to send your excellency my
acknowledgments for all honours received at _Boston_: they are much
upon my heart. I pray GOD to reward your excellency a thousand-fold.

Great things hath the glorious _Emmanuel_ done for me and his people
on the way: the word has been attended with much power. Surely our
LORD intends to set _America_ in a flame. This week Mr. _G―――― T――――_
purposes to set out for _Boston_, in order to blow up the divine fire
lately kindled there. I recommend him to your excellency as a solid,
judicious, and zealous minister of the LORD JESUS CHRIST: he will be
ready to preach daily: I suppose his brethren will readily open their
doors: may the LORD at the same time open the people’s hearts, that
they may diligently attend to the things that shall be spoken. Dear Mr.
_R――――_ grows in grace: I left him at _Brunswick_, full of gratitude
for his late journey. I am persuaded it was of GOD. I hope he will
be instrumental in quickening both ministers and people. He is worthy
of your excellency’s particular regard: under GOD he may need it. I
expect he will soon be reviled and persecuted for his blessed Master’s
sake: may the LORD enable him to rejoice and be exceeding glad. Dear
Sir, the welfare of dear _Boston_ people, especially the welfare of
your own soul, lies upon me night and day. I remember your tears: I
remember your excellency’s words, “Mr. _Whitefield_, pray that I may
hunger and thirst after righteousness.” O how did these words rejoice
me! for I thought your excellency wanted a more clear view of your own
vileness, and of the all-sufficiency of JESUS CHRIST; I mean a more
clear, experimental view: for what is all head-knowledge without that
of the heart? it only settles people more upon their lees. May GOD
give you to see and to follow the simplicity of the blessed JESUS.
Whilst you are in the world, may you not be of it: may you be dead to
magnificence, and alive to nothing but what leads you directly to your
GOD.

_Honoured Sir_, I make no apology for this freedom: your excellency
bid me not spare rulers; no, not the chief of them. Indeed I long
after your salvation; O that I could do any thing to promote it! If my
prayers, or any thing within my power may be instrumental thereunto,
your excellency may command, honoured Sir,

              Your Excellency’s obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXII.

                      _To Mr. M――――, at London._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1740._
  _My dear Brother_,

STILL my LORD shews me greater things. At _New-York_ the Holy Ghost
came down like a mighty rushing wind. At _Baskenridge_ still a greater
awakening among young and old. One that received CHRIST cried out,
“He is come! He is come!” &c. The poor creature was wrapped up in the
LORD JESUS: and both there and at _New-York_ my soul was taken almost
out of the body. At _Newark_ the LORD worked wonderfully amongst some
young men; and here at _Philadelphia_ the word runs very swiftly.
This afternoon, how beautiful did the LORD appear in his sanctuary!
I would cry out, “How amiable are thy dwellings, thou LORD of hosts!”
In several places, almost as large as _Northampton_, are many faithful
labourers. We all think and speak the same things: O that it was so
at _London_! The LORD enables me to confute error wherever I see it.
Pray for me, that I may be made faithful to my LORD and Master: he is
dearer to me every day: he will have mercy, because he will have mercy.
See brother _L――――_’s letter. Another journal comes out shortly. My
hearty love to all. Stand fast in the faith: quit yourselves like men:
be strong. Above all, give thanks to GOD; and pray in behalf of, dear
Mr. _M――――_,

             Your most affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXIII.

                        _To Mr. G―――― L――――._

                                      _Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1740._
  _Dear Brother L――――_,

I Wrote to you last week from _New-York_. You may give friends this
brief account of me: On last _Saturday_ evening I arrived at this
place, having preached at _Staten Island_, _Newark_, _Baskenridge_,
_New Brunswick_, and _Trenton_, in my way hither from _New York_. A
wonderful presence of GOD was observable at _New-York_, _Baskenridge_,
and _Newark_. I preached here twice yesterday, and also to-day, in
a large house built by the people since I was here last. It is an
hundred feet long, and seventy feet wide; and is intended for a school,
as well as a place for public worship. The walls are brick, and the
roof is now almost ready to be put up. GOD hath remarkably appeared
in the carrying on the building; and the holy spirit hath sweetly
moved on the hearers souls every time I preached in it. I intend, GOD
willing, to stay here this, and to embark for _Georgia_ the latter end
of next week; and propose, GOD willing, to return to _England_ for a
short time, in the Spring.

The LORD highly favours me; I am more sick of myself, and more in love
with CHRIST daily: he is a dear, dear Master: Oh that all would love
him with all their hearts! Adieu: it is late. The LORD be with your
spirit.

       Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXIV.

              _To the Rev. Mr. D――――, at New Brunswick._

                                             _Salem, Nov. 20, 1740._
  _My very dear Brother_,

EXCESS of business, not a want of love, prevented my writing to you
from _Philadelphia_. I feel that I love you in the bowels of the dear
JESUS, our ever blessed and glorious _Emmanuel_: he hath done great
things for me since you left us. Yesterday at _Cohansie_ the spirit of
the LORD moved over the whole congregation: what reason have we to be
thankful for the great things we both see and hear! My dear brother,
indeed I desire to lie in the dust. O how good is my LORD to me!
thoughts cannot conceive, or words express it! I long to be in glory,
that I may praise him as I would. I rejoice to hear that the LORD is
with you. Shortly, I believe, you will evangelize. All friends kindly
salute you. Adieu. In great haste, I am

           Your very affectionate, though unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXXXV.

                        _To Mr. J―――― H――――._

                                _Bohemia, (Maryland) Nov. 24, 1740._
  _My very dear Brother_,

I Rejoice to hear that you are married: I salute your wife and
my sister in CHRIST: may you love one another, as CHRIST and his
church. I have lately conversed closely with _P―――― B――――_: alas! we
differ widely in many respects; therefore, to avoid disputation and
jealousies on both sides, it is best to carry on the work of GOD apart.
The divisions among the brethren sometimes grieve, but do not surprize
me. How can it be otherwise, when teachers do not think and speak
the same things? GOD grant we may keep up a cordial undissembled love
towards each other, notwithstanding our different opinions. O how do
I long for heaven! Surely, _there_ will be no divisions, no strife
there, but who shall sing with most affection to the Lamb that sitteth
upon the throne. Dear _James_, there I hope to meet thee; for the dear
JESUS, I believe, hath locked thee fast in his almighty arms. Lean
thou on his sacred bosom night and day; keep close to him, and be what
I long to be, a little child. Adieu. I am ready to weep tears of love.
My dear brother, I should be glad to wash any of the brethren’s feet:
indeed I am now willing to be the servant of all. The more the LORD
honours me, the more I feel my unworthiness. I am sometimes sick of
love, and often, often sick of self. O that GOD should have mercy on
such a sinner! Help me, dear _James_, to praise my Saviour. A glorious
church is raising in _America_. The LORD mightily reveals his arm.
It would please you to see his outgoings, his stately steps in the
great congregation. I only want fellow-labourers. I look to JESUS for
this, and for every thing. I desire you to print nothing against your
conscience: only do not immediately censure every thing that may not
seem clear to you: our LORD may guide me, even into things which as
yet you may not see into. The day of judgment will discover all. Adieu.

             Ever, ever yours in our blessed _Emmanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXVI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. J. W._

                                 _Bohemia (Maryland) Nov. 24, 1740._
  _Dear and Hon. Sir_,

LAST night brother _G――――_ brought me your two kind letters. O that
there may be harmony, and very intimate union between us! Yet it
cannot be, since you hold _universal Redemption_. But no more of this.
Perhaps, in Spring, we may see each other face to face. This evening,
GOD willing, I propose to embark for _Georgia_. Wonderful things our
LORD brings to pass, in these parts, every day. Here is a close
opposition from some of the _Presbyterian Clergy_. The seed of the
serpent is the same in all, of whatever communion. I expect much more
opposition every hour. The devil rages in _London_. He begins now to
triumph indeed. The children of GOD are disunited among themselves.
The king of the church shall yet over-rule all things for good. My
dear brother, for CHRIST’s sake avoid all disputation. Do not oblige
me to preach against you; I had rather die. Be gentle towards the ――――.
They will get great advantage over you, if they discover any irregular
warmth in your temper. I cannot for my soul unite with the _Moravian
Brethren_. _Honoured Sir_, Adieu!

                   Yours eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXVII.

                       _Saint George’s (Pensylvania) Nov. 24, 1740._
  _Dear Brother T――――_,

GOD has revived his own work in _Philadelphia_. His glory filled
the great house. The affairs belonging thereto, I believe, are
well settled. We have had precious times at _Cohansi_, _Salem_,
_Fogs-mannor_, _Nottingham_, _Whiteclay_, _Creek_ and _Bohemia_.
Brother _G――――_ is come from _England_ very opportunely. Brother
_S――――_ comes about _Christmas_. The brethren I think do grow, though
sadly divided. But our LORD will order all for good.――Upon several
accounts, I think it best to embark for _England_ as soon as possible
in the Spring. O pray for me, that I may not by any means grieve the
children of GOD. I hope the weather is warm enough for you. I trust
our LORD has warmed and filled your dear soul. Your brother _Charles_
is with me. My dear fellow travellers salute you and our dear brother
_R――――_. My love to all that love the LORD JESUS. The war goes
on bravely between _Michael_ and the _Dragon_. Our dear LORD (O
condescending love!) is wonderous kind to your poor, weak, unworthy
brother and servant in
CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCXXXVIII.

                                      _Reedy-Island, Nov. 26, 1740._
  _Dear Mr. F――――_,

I Thank you for your letter.――You may print my life, as you desire.
GOD willing, I shall correct my two volumes of sermons, and send them
the very first opportunity.――Pray write to me by every ship, that goes
shortly to _Charles-Town_.――――

I shall embark for _England_, GOD willing, about _February_.――I desire
I may hear from you there also, as often as possible. I have prefaced
_Jenks_, and _Presumptuous sinners detected_. Mr. _Bradford_ has the
last, because he said he was to print it. You may have it of him.――The
_Ornaments of the daughter of Sion_, you may have hereafter. Dear
Sir, Adieu. I do not despair of your seeing the reasonableness of
christianity. Apply to GOD; be willing to do the divine will, and
you shall know it. I have heard from Mr. _S――――_; all is well. To-day
several friends have taken leave of me at this place, waiting for a
fair wind in order to embark for _Georgia_. I think I have been on
shore 73 days, and have been enabled to travel upwards of 800 miles,
and to preach 170 times, besides very frequent exhortations at private
houses. I have collected, in goods and money, upwards of 700 _l._
sterling, for the Orphan-house; blessed be GOD! Great and visible are
the fruits of my late, as well as former feeble labours, and people in
general seem more eager after the word than ever. O the love of GOD to

                        Your unworthy friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXXXIX.

                       _To Mr. N. in New-York._

                                      _Charles-Town, Dec. 10, 1740._
  _My very dear Brother_,

IN eight days, the LORD brought us hither. We arrived last night, when
the Redeemer vouchsafed so to fill me with his divine consolations,
that I could scarce sleep. I have been preaching this morning on the
fire that happened of late from these words, Isa. i. 9. “Except the
LORD of HOSTS had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have
been as ♦_Sodom_, and we should have been like unto _Gomorrah_.” I am
now determined to see _England_ as soon as possible. I have had much
of GOD’s presence in our passage hither from _Philadelphia_, and have
many precious letters to send you. O follow me with your prayers. I
leave _Charles-Town_, GOD willing, to-night, in order to hasten to
their relief, and shall go in the same sloop which brought me here,
to my beloved _Georgia_. As soon as possible, I will send you a long
letter. In the mean while, accept of my love from, dear Mr. _N――――_,

              Your very affectionate friend and brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘Sodam’ replaced with ‘Sodom’


                             LETTER CCXL.

                        _To Mr. G―――― C――――._

                 _On board the Savannah for Georgia, Dec. 11, 1740._
  _Dear Brother C――――_,

YOUR late letters, especially that which you sent me by way of
_Charles-Town_, made me smile.――I was glad to find that you had not so
far thrown off all outward things, as to resolve not to write to any
one; and I thought I knew the frame of your heart, as though I was
within you. My dear, dear _George C――――_, I love you tenderly in the
bowels of JESUS CHRIST, and therefore would not have you be deceived.
Alas, why do you pervert this text of scripture, “Be still, and know
that I am the LORD,” as if it was designed to keep a christian from
striving, or meant a _stillness of body_, or waiting upon GOD only in
silence? The expression is taken out of the 46th Psalm, where GOD’s
fury against the heathen is described in the most lively colours;
and then lest his people should complain of the severity of his
dispensations, GOD commands them to be _still_, “not to murmur or
repine, knowing that he was the LORD, and might do what seemed him
good.” Thus _Tate_ and _Brady_ in their translations explain it, and
this is the true and genuine meaning of that sentence. It hath no
reference to stillness in prayer, or stillness of body. Dear brother,
I speak to you plainly, because I love you. I think I know what it is
to wait upon the LORD in silence, and to feel the spirit of GOD making
intercession for me with groanings which cannot be uttered. Often have
I been at such times filled as it were with the fulness of GOD, and
I do now daily carry on a communion with the most high GOD and the
ever-blessed JESUS. But all this I fear is contrary to the _false
stillness_, you and some others seem to have fallen into. I was just
in the same case some years ago at _Oxford_, when I declined writing,
reading, and such like exercises, because I would be _still_. The LORD
convinced me; I pray he may also convince you of this delusion. Dear
_George_, consider how contrary your maxim is to our Saviour’s. You
say, “_Be still._” He says, “_Strive._” As in an agony, “Strive that
you may enter in at the strait gate.” Indeed, my dear man, I pity you,
knowing you have but a weak judgment, though a well-meaning heart.
You once thought that you was born again; then, you found it was only
an elapse of the Holy Ghost. You used to say, you wished you could
believe from experience in the doctrine of election; now, you find
as yet no evidence within yourself that you are a real christian.
You take too much refuge, I fear, in the doctrine of _universal
redemption_. It is the finest doctrine in the world to cause a soul to
be falsely still, and to say _Peace, Peace_, when there is no peace.
You seem to insist upon sinless perfection, and to think a man hath
no real salvation till he literally cannot commit sin. From whose
experience do you write this? Not from your _own_, dear _George_;
for I much question, if ever your heart was truly broken or had a
saving closure with CHRIST. You seem to mention _Peter Bochler_ as
an instance; but alas, though he has been washed in the blood of the
Lamb, so as to be justified from all his sins, yet like me his feet
want washing still, and will, till he bows down his head and gives up
the ghost. I have conversed with him intimately. Take heed, brother,
of having any thing too much in admiration, or of thinking you must
necessarily find CHRIST at such and such a place. You have been at
_M――――_. I believe you have seen many dear children of GOD; but have
you returned home with CHRIST in your heart? Your letters do not speak
much improvement in the school of CHRIST. If GOD loves you, he will
let you see the vanity of your present imaginations, and bring you to
see that salvation is not of him that willeth, or of him that runneth,
but of GOD that sheweth mercy. Dear _George_, be not given to change;
be not too fond of new things. “To the law and to the testimony,” and
see what CHRIST and his apostles have spoken. I speak this out of love,
and not in reference to myself. If GOD blesses another ministry to
your soul, I rejoice, yea and will rejoice. But if I see you fall into
errors, do not be angry if I tell you the truth. If you are, I will
notwithstanding love and pray for you. That errors are crept in among
you, I think is too plain: but I suspend my judgment till the Spring,
when, GOD willing, I hope to be in _London_. In the mean while pray
for me, that I may with joy bear to be deserted by those, who once
were blessed and awakened by my ministry, and to whom I am a spiritual
father, though they may have many instructors. Dear _George_, may the
LORD be with you. He only knows how dear you are to my heart. It is
near midnight; but it was much upon my heart to write you this letter.
That GOD may sanctify it to your edification and comfort, is the
hearty prayer of

       Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXLI.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. C――――._

                          _Good-Hope (South-Carolina) Jan. 1, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I am now going to _Charles-Town_, in order to embark for _England_;
the cloud of GOD’s providence seems to be moving that way; I have
enjoyed much of the divine presence since I left _Boston_, and have
had a comfortable Christmas with my dear family at _Georgia_. At
my return, I found my Orphan-houshold removed from _Savannah_ to
_Bethesda_, and great improvements made during the time of my absence.
The great house will be finished, GOD willing, so as to be habitable,
in about two months. It would have been finished so far by this time,
if the _Spaniards_ had not taken a schooner loaded with bricks and
other provisions to a considerable value; but GOD about the same time
stirred up the heart of a planter in _South-Carolina_, lately brought
home at the orphan-house to GOD, to send my family some rice and beef.
At other times, when they have wanted food, the _Indians_ have brought
plenty of venison. GOD, every day, more and more convinces us that
this work is of him. His power has been made known, especially among
the young ones. I bless GOD, I have settled my family to my great
satisfaction, and verily believe I shall live to see great things come
from the Orphan-house. GOD works upon the hearts of the labourers. One
woman hath had a glorious discovery of CHRIST made to her heart: last
week, two or three men where brought into heart-distress, and another
young man that came to see us, was made so sick of sin, as to feel the
want of, and to enquire after the great and all-powerful physician of
souls. My family, I think, consists now of 89 persons. Next year my
expences will be contracted much; but at present, I am in debt about
500 _l._ sterling. However, I know in whom I have believed, ONE who
is able to pay it. My public accounts will be published as soon as
I arrive at _London_, with a prospect of the Orphan-house, and other
little houses and gardens annexed unto it. I am now at the house of
one _Mr. Jonathan B――――_, who, I trust, with his brother _Mr. H――――
B――――_, and another young man, lately a player in _New-York_, are
settled by a living faith in JESUS CHRIST. The latter, I intend for
the ministry. Mr. _H―――― B――――_’s wife died not long since, rejoicing
in GOD her Saviour. Several others also in these parts are grown
in grace, and Mr. _C――――_’s ministry hath been much blessed.――Satan
hath been sowing tares in old _England_. Oh that _Boston_ ministers
and people may pray for me! Indeed, I love them in the bowels of the
blessed JESUS. _Vale! longum etsi spero non in æternum, vale._ That
CHRIST’s kingdom may flourish in your heart, and that you may greatly
promote it in the souls of others, is the hearty prayer of, Reverend
and dear Sir,

    Your affectionate unworthy fellow-servant, in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER ♦CCXLII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. C――――._

                                      _Charles-Town, Jan. 12, 1741._
  _Dear and Reverend Sir_,

LAST _Saturday_ I was taken up for being concerned in correcting
the inclosed printed letter, written by Mr. _H―――― B――――n_, whose
conversion you have an account of in the other letter sent herewith. I
think it may be for GOD’s glory to have them all printed in _Boston_.
I am bound over to appear next sessions, as well as Mr. _B――――_. He,
I believe, for _libelling the king_, and I for _libelling the clergy_,
in saying they break the Canons daily. I think, dear Sir, these are
earnests of what I must expect to meet with in my native country.
Opposition, as yet, seems to be only like a cloud rising out of the
sea, no bigger than a man’s hand. Perhaps it will gather to a great
body, and break upon the church of GOD. Our LORD will be our refuge in
every storm. He is much with my soul, and fills me abundantly, I could
almost say superabundantly, with his presence. We have seen precious
times. One person had a glorious discovery of CHRIST about two days
ago. I expect my family will be like the burning bush. I find I am
in debt for them upwards of six hundred pounds: but the LORD will
provide.――My most tender love awaits all that love him. I am to appear
at the sessions by an attorney. Dear Sir, remember,

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘CXLII’ replaced with ‘CCXLII’


                           LETTER CCXLIII.

              _To the Rev. Mr. C――――, at Rhode Island._

                                      _Charles-Town, Jan. 16, 1741._
  _Reverend and Dear Sir_,

I Snatch a few moments to write you a line before I embark for
_England_. Blessed be GOD, you are near your desired haven. Yet a
little while, and you shall safely arrive in _Abraham_’s bosom. _I
præ, sequar, esti non passibus equis._――Great things GOD is doing
daily. The kingdom of heaven (I hope) is at hand. I am bound over
to appear at the sessions here, by my attorney, for libelling the
clergy, because I corrected the letter inclosed. A scene of suffering
lies before me, but wherefore should I fear? Our LORD strengthens me
mightily in the inner man. We have had much of his presence in our
assemblies. But I must have done. Dear and Reverend Sir, adieu. I
scarce expect to see you again in the flesh; but this is my comfort,
I shall see and rejoice with you above. There, I will sit and tell you
what GOD hath done for

          Your unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXLIV.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. C――――, in Boston._

                                      _Charles-Town, Jan. 16, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THOUGH I have packed up two letters for you already, yet I cannot
refrain from sending you a third. Just now I was favoured with yours
dated last _December 1_. Indeed, it gave me much comfort, and endeared
the writer of it to me more and more. Sir, why am I thus highly
favoured! I now wish to sink exceeding low, and cry out, Grace,
grace! O the love of GOD! The sovereignty of CHRIST! The unchangeable
loving-kindness of our heavenly Father! Excuse me, dear Mr. _C――――_;
my heart is full. I want for all men to love the LORD JESUS. It
greatly rejoices me, to hear so many are coming to him. He is a loving
tender master. He attends to my minutest wants, and surprizingly helps
me in every emergency. I thank dear Mr. _C――――_, for the kind token of
his love. Good measure pressed down and running over, may GOD return
into your bosom! You will be pleased to correct the press. I am filled
with comfort to hear of the conduct of the dear governor, &c. I cannot
but think our LORD will let his word run, and be abundantly glorified
in _America_. _Boston_ people are much upon my heart. The memory of
their forefathers is precious to my soul. May you live to see the
spirit of scriptural _Puritanism_ universally prevail! I hope you
will write every opportunity. If I am in prison, it will make me arise
at midnight to sing praises to GOD, to hear that _Boston_ people are
alive to CHRIST. At present, my heart is full of peace and joy. We
have had solemn meetings. I am much strengthened on every side; but
I must not say more. Time is short. Dear Mr. _C――――_, adieu. May the
LORD be with you and yours. I could now drop a tear of love.――My love
to all.

                            I am yours &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXLV.

                   _To Mr. W―――― D――――, at Boston._

                 _On board the Minerva, for England, Jan. 17, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

MR. _P――――_ hath just brought me your kind letter. Blessed be GOD,
that his word runs and is glorified in _Boston_. Surely, dear Sir, I
shall never forget that people; indeed, they are very near and dear
unto my soul. May those of your own household, in particular, be not
only convicted but converted; may the dear JESUS fill you with all
peace and joy in believing, and enable you to pray for, dear Sir,

                     Yours in the blessed JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._

P. S. Excuse great haste; our ship is just under sail. My dear
companions kindly salute you and yours.


                            LETTER CCXLVI.

                         _To Mr. Wm. G――――._

         _On board the Minerva, Feb. 8, 1741. in latitude 35, 24 N._
  _My dear brother_,

SEE how soon I write to you, and from thence infer how I love you.
Whether it proceeds from the pride and naughtiness of my heart, I
cannot tell; but, I frankly confess, I love to see persons humble,
kind, and courteous to those, whom GOD hath made their spiritual
fathers. I believe it is well pleasing to GOD, and very amiable in
the sight of all good men. Your christian grateful behaviour to me in
this respect, hath much endeared you to me. GOD only knows how I love
you. I bear you upon my heart, and often secretly sigh out before the
LORD,――“O let my dear brother _G――――_ live before thee.” This is the
desire of my soul for you. I cannot wish you a better thing. Yet a
little while, and we shall be together again. But, before that time,
I expect to suffer great things. The LORD is able to deliver me out of
all. I have just now experienced his divine assistance in composing a
sermon. This is the _sixth_ which he has enabled me to finish, since
I have been on board. O my dear brother, love a precious CHRIST, and
shew it by adorning his gospel in all things. He has highly favoured
you, indeed he hath. If you and I are not eminently holy, if you and
I think any thing too much to be done for the LORD, we are of all men
the most ungrateful. O the love of CHRIST! I feel it, I feel it. GOD
now sheds it abroad in my heart. May it abundantly also be shed on
you by the Holy Ghost. Write to me if in prison, my friends will bring
it to me there. GOD will hear me for you even in a dungeon. Methinks
I see you weep; but weep not for me, unless it be before the LORD,
and then I care not how soon you retire, and pour out your prayers in
behalf of, dear Mr. _G――――_,

            Your affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXLVII.

                  _To Mrs. L――――, at Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 11, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. L――――_,

YOU was upon the mount when I left _Charles-Town_; I hope you have
not thrown yourself down. Keep close to CHRIST, and cast not off your
first love. Remember what GOD has done for your soul. Forget not the
glorious discovery JESUS CHRIST has made of himself to your heart; and
though a cloud should overshadow you, let not Satan make you doubt of
your being a child of GOD. O Mrs. _L――――_, how holy ought you to be
in all manner of conversation and godliness! Why are you taken? Why
are you in the arms of everlasting love? Methinks I hear you cry out,
Grace! grace! And well you may; for indeed you are saved by grace. The
free grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST be with you now and for ever more.
Blessed be GOD, I experience much of it in the ship. I hope divine
grace moves me to send you this small letter. If GOD blesses it to
your soul, put up a short prayer for

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXLVIII.

                  _To Mrs. W――――, at James-Island._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 11, 1741._
  _Dear Madam_,

MY heart’s desire and prayer to GOD is, that you may be saved. I hope
you will find, it is not impossible for you to be born again when you
are old. GOD forbid. Though at the eleventh hour, I trust our LORD
will meet you, and cause you, whenever you depart, with good old
_Simeon_, to depart in peace. I heartily thank you, madam, for all
favours conferred on me and mine. We have not forgotten you on board.
I do not forget to mention you in my secret prayers. May GOD reveal
his dear Son in your soul, and fill you with all peace and joy in
believing! O what a staff will this be to you in your old age! How
pleasantly then will you walk by your vault, and say, “There shall
I lay my weary bones ere long.” I hope you do not startle at the
thoughts of death. Believe in CHRIST. Get a saving interest in his
blood, and then you may cry out, “O death, where is thy sting! O
grave, where is thy victory?” Blessed be GOD, the prospect of death is
pleasing to my soul. I would not live here always: I want to be gone.
That you and I, whenever our appointed time is come, may live with
CHRIST, is the earnest prayer of, madam,

              Your obliged friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXLIX.

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 12, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. T._,

MUST I pray for you in the language of _Martha_ and _Mary_, saying,
“LORD, she whom thou lovest is sick!” Or hath he who touched _Peter_’s
wife’s mother, rebuked the illness that was coming upon you, when
I saw you last, and caused it to leave you? But, however the LORD
has dealt with you, I hope he hath been glorified in and by you. I
heard he had by his word and spirit spoken to your soul, and given
you satisfaction, that he had loved you with an everlasting love. I
rejoice in it from my soul. The LORD increase your comforts daily,
and shew you all his glory. Dear Mrs. _T――――_, think often of your
departed sister. Follow her as she did CHRIST; and then shortly, where
she is you shall be also. O the happiness she now enjoys! It is too
dazzling for mortal eyes. I want to leap my seventy years, and fly
away to GOD. Well, it will not be long. Dear Mrs. _T――――_, let us
patiently tarry till our change come. Our LORD will carry us safe
through time, and waft us triumphantly into eternity. The love of
CHRIST constrained me to write these lines; accept them for his sake,
from

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCL.

            _To Mr. H――――, at Port-Royal, South-Carolina._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. H._,

THE love of CHRIST constrains me to write you a line, though as yet no
further than the western islands. I trust the LORD hath called you by
name, and enabled you to say “Speak LORD, for thy servant heareth.”
Who knows but he may call you yet further, even to minister before
him? Whether it be so or not, make it your daily study to prepare
your heart to serve the LORD in any station. To be a doorkeeper in the
house of GOD, is a glorious post. Surely, you and I may sing of mercy
and electing love. How often have we acted a part for the devil?
The remembrance of it is grievous unto me. Let us both now labour
daily to act a part for GOD. He heaps kindnesses on me every hour. We
have hitherto had a wonderful pleasant passage. I hope it is in some
measure owing to your prayers. Let this encourage you to pray again.
Our GOD is a GOD hearing prayer. I write now, lest excess of business
should prevent my writing in _England_. The LORD is girding me for the
battle, and strengthening me mightily in the inner man. “O give thanks
unto the LORD of all Lords, because his mercy endureth for ever.” You
will not fail writing to

       Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCLI.

            _To the Reverend Mr. C――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

THE LORD hath been with me, and is now with me in an especial manner.
I have been enabled to prepare nine discourses for the press. My body
waxes stronger, and last night the great GOD in a glorious manner
filled and overshadowed my soul. I am panting after the compleat
holiness of JESUS my LORD. I have various scenes of action lying
before me, and am waiting upon the LORD my GOD for direction. He
assures me that he will be with me. He saith unto me, “Fear not, speak
out, no one shall set upon thee to hurt thee.” Dear Mr. _C――――_, GOD’s
goodness quite surprizes me. I cannot express myself better, than in
a stanza or two of _Erskine_ in his Paraphrase upon _Solomon_’s song.

                                  I.

               _What wonders LORD dost thou perform,
                  That stoopest thus so low,
                To put thy beauty on a worm,
                  And then commend it so._

                                 II.

               _What, dost thou praise a native black?
                  I blush to find it true;
                O lend me words to render back
                  The praise to whom ’tis due._

I hope my love will find acceptance with all your flock who know
me, and who love the LORD JESUS in sincerity. I have often comforted
myself and companions with this saying, “Now Mr. _C――――_ and our other
friends are praying for us.” At the receipt of this, turn your prayers
into praises, and then turn your praises again into prayers, in behalf
of, dear Mr. _C――――_,

    Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER ♦CCLII.

                            _To Mr. H. B._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _My dear brother in CHRIST_,

BEFORE this is brought to your hands, I suppose you will have been
arraigned before the Chief Justice. I am persuaded our LORD will plead
on your behalf, and strengthen you with his mighty power in the inner
man. The greater progress you make in the divine life, the more you
will discover of the enmity that is in the seed of the serpent. It
bruised our master’s heel; it will also bruise ours. Here is our
comfort, GOD who cannot lie, hath told us, that “we shall bruise his
head.” In the strength of this promise, I can give men and devils
the challenge. Whole legions are ready to beset me. By the help of my
GOD, I shall triumph over all.――I hope we shall grow in grace before
we meet again. You and I have weak crazy tabernacles; I hope you
rejoice in the prospect of putting them off shortly; blessed be GOD,
I do.――Dear Sir, get acquainted more and more with electing love;
study the covenant of redemption, and see how GOD loved you with
an everlasting love. This will cause you to glory only in the LORD,
and to pass through the valley of the shadow of death, with a full
assurance of faith; knowing that CHRIST hath engaged to lodge you safe
in eternal glory. Thither your dear wife is gone before us; I often
think of, I could almost say envy her; but perhaps that is wrong. Yet
a little while, and our precious LORD shall take both you, and

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘CLII’ replaced with ‘CCLII’


                            LETTER CCLIII.

                    _To Mr. B――――, at Port-Royal._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B._,

I Hope you will never forget that day, hour, or moment, wherein GOD
met you at _Savannah_. If you have in some measure, do so no more.
“Awake thou that sleepest, and CHRIST shall give thee light.” Love not
the world, neither the things that are in the world. No man can serve
two masters. Use the world, but let it be as though you used it not.
The fashion of this world will soon, very soon, fade away. Dear Mr.
_B――――_, I am persuaded, will not be offended at this plain dealing.
He knows I love him. GOD knows it also. With much affection, I
subscribe myself

                       Your friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLIV.

                             _To Mrs. B._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. B._,

WHEN you read that JESUS loved _Lazarus_, _Mary_, and their sister
_Martha_, do you not make a particular application to your own family?
I think our LORD has been equally kind to your houshold. Walk as
becometh members of the houshold of faith. I hope you have had full
satisfaction about your state, and know assuredly that CHRIST is your
Saviour. If not, be not discouraged; go on the way of duty, is the way
of safety. By-and-by your soul shall magnify the LORD, and your spirit
rejoice in GOD your Saviour. This is the hearty desire of, dear Mrs.
_B――――_,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCLV.

                        _To Mr. J―――― B――――._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

YOUR name, _Jonathan_, puts me in mind of a good old testament
worthy. Follow him in his faith, and dare to scale the wall of
the _Philistines_. Be not afraid, though already bound over as a
_libeller_; shortly you shall shine in the kingdom of your Father; I
say, your Father; for GOD is your GOD, and will be your guide and
guard unto death. Does not this astonish you? Do not you feel your
heart melt? Are you not ready to cry out, “Why me, LORD?” The oftener
you repeat such language the better. I love to see a soul lie in the
dust under a sense of electing love; you and yours have been highly
favoured. May GOD give you all grace to walk worthy of the holy
vocation wherewith you are called. I write this out of the fulness of
my heart. Though not present, yet I fain would converse with you. O
that I may see you grown in grace! Remember me to your wife. The LORD
be with you both: He hath been, he is now with me. You are often upon
my heart. GOD reward you for your kindness to the Orphans. Do not
slack your hands towards them. Our bountiful master will richly reward
you. Go on steadily in the use of, but do not trust in ordinances.
You know what I mean. Be steady and bold, yet meek and catholic in
your conversation and practice; and if GOD hath influenced you by my
ministry, give him the glory, and for CHRIST’s sake pray for

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLVI.

                   _To Mr. B――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B._,

I Think of you often, indeed I do, I long to hear that complete
salvation is come to your soul. I say complete salvation, for my
dear friend knows that reformation is not conversion. O that you may
experience a life hid with CHRIST in GOD! Some who seemingly put their
hands to the plough, have already shamefully looked back; will Mr.
_B._ also go away? Methinks I hear him say, “Whether shall I go? JESUS
CHRIST alone hath the words of eternal life.” True, JESUS alone is the
way, the truth and the life; flee, flee to him, my dear friend; with
arms he stands ready to embrace, and will save you to the uttermost.
Remember, my friend, the vows of the LORD are upon you. These hands
reached out to you the sacred symbols of his precious body and blood.
These eyes saw you eat and drink of his bread and his wine. O do not
betray, but manfully stand up for the LORD JESUS. You was once bold
for satan, be now bold for your CHRIST. His love excites me to write
to, and pray for you. Your wife also I intreat the LORD to bless,
together with your children. My friends join me in hearty wishes for
your welfare. I am, dear Mr. _B――――_,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLVII.

                _To the Rev. Mr. D――――, at Edinburgh._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

IF I mistake not, Mr. _M._ informed me, that you was entered into the
ministry; I pray GOD to enable you to make full proof of it. O dear
Sir, how holy ought we to be, who are called to stand before the LORD.
――When I consider the greatness of the office and my own unworthiness,
I am sometimes quite abashed. This promise, “Lo I am with you always,”
is my daily support. Blessed be GOD, I find it fulfilled in my soul.
A great work is begun in _America_, at _Georgia_, _South-Carolina_,
_New-York_, _Philadelphia_, and _New-England_. GOD has confirmed the
word by spiritual miracles and signs. You will see what I have wrote
to dear Mr. _T――――_. Your assistance in respect to the Orphan-house
will be very acceptable. I am several hundreds of pounds in debt on
that account. The GOD whom I serve is able to discharge it. You have
heard of the liberality of the _New-England_ people; dear Mr. _D――――_
GOD’s goodness astonishes me. What! can I think any thing too much
to do, or to suffer for so dear a Master? I was lately bound over
at _Charles-Town_ in _South-Carolina_, for libelling the clergy. The
_libel_, falsely so called, I shall soon send you after my arrival.
Thus opposition is coming on gradually: pray that the LORD may cover
me with all his armour. I am a weak defenceless creature in myself;
JESUS alone is my strength and my Redeemer. I write this on board,
that you may know, you are not forgotten; no, tho’ I never saw you in
the flesh, you are much beloved by, dear Sir,

            Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer
                     in our dear LORD’s vineyard,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLVIII.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. T――――, at Edisto._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. T._,

PROVIDENCE prevented my coming to see you at _Edisto_,――however, I
must not omit writing to you now. How is it with your heart? I hope
you are not _nimis uxorius_; take heed, my dear _B――――_, take heed.
Time is short. It remains that those who have wives, be as tho’ they
had none. Let nothing intercept, or interrupt your communion with the
bridegroom of the church. I hope you do not feel such damps of soul,
as you used to complain of. May the LORD of glory dispel every black
cloud, and cause you continually to rejoice in his salvation. You have
strong passions. The LORD JESUS is stronger: In his strength may you
subdue them, till you are meek as a lamb, and are become a very little
child. I write thus, because I pray for you most heartily.――Deal with
me in the same manner; and now, dear brother, farewel. The LORD be
with you. He is pleased to refresh my soul, and give me the prospect
of a short passage. I commend myself and affairs to the prayers of
your flock, and I earnestly recommend you to the GOD of all grace.
That he may bless you and give you an inheritance among all them that
are sanctified, is the earnest prayer of, dear Mr. _T.――――_,

      Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer in the LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLIX.

                  _To Mrs. B――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. B._,

I Am much obliged to you many ways. The LORD reward you a
thousand-fold. Your prayers are heard. GOD is carrying us upon the
wings of the wind. The angel of the covenant accompanies us in the
way. The present season is a time of refreshing to my soul. I hope it
will be a profitable voyage. I think I see more into the wickedness
of my own heart, and the unsearchable riches of the LORD JESUS, who
hath redeemed me by his precious blood. I believe you can say so: Why
do you shake your head? Woman, why doubtest thou? Has not the LORD
visited your soul? Have you not heard him say in his word, applied by
his spirit, “I have loved thee with an everlasting love?” And do you
think GOD would tell you so, if it was not so? Away therefore with
all desponding fears; come boldly, with a full assurance of faith, and
draw water plentifully out of the wells of salvation. O that all were
comforted, as I am now comforted of GOD. I would not eat my spiritual
morsels alone. I hope, a letter from you will acquaint me, how good
the LORD has been to your soul. I have no greater joy, than to hear
that my christian friends walk in the truth. The LORD be with you.
Remember me to your father and sisters. That you all may be true
members of the houshold of faith, prays

                Your affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCLX.

                _To Mr. B. and his wife at Bethesda._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Dear brother B――――_,

WHEN I left _Charles-Town_, the LORD seemed to give me a full
assurance, that we should have a speedy passage.――We have hitherto
had scarce any contrary winds, and are now very near the Western
Islands. We had one storm the first week, but almost ever since have
been favoured with weather as well as wind. O that you would call the
family together, and praise the LORD for the mercies conferred on us
the unworthiest of the sons of men! I do not know that I have failed
praying for you one day, since I have been out. I long to hear what
the LORD hath done for your souls. What say you? Do you live in love?
Do you strive together with me in your prayers? Are any of the Orphan
Lambs bleating after their great Shepherd? Is your mouth opened? Is
your heart enlarged? Is your soul swallowed up in GOD? Does _Bethesda_
answer its name? Is it, indeed, an house of mercy? These questions, I
hope to have answer’d in the affirmative. If you ask, how it is with
my soul? Blessed be GOD, I can reply, “Very well.” The LORD gives me
a feeling possession of himself. I have been enabled to compose _nine
discourses_ for the press. GOD willing, you shall hear from me often.
I write this, that I may be ready, if I should hear of any ship coming
your way immediately upon my arrival; receive it as a token of my love,
which GOD knows is unfeigned, from

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXI.

                   _To Mr. J. B――――, Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

I Think I owe you a letter; I believe you love me in the bowels of
JESUS CHRIST. I hope our love is reciprocal. How can it be otherwise
with those, who have drank of the same spirit? I long for that happy
time, when we shall be swallowed up in the vision and full fruition of
the glorious Godhead. The bunch of grapes makes me long to eat of the
full clusters in the heavenly Canaan. The first-fruits make me pant
after the full harvest. Perhaps you may go and partake of it first,
and drink new wine before me in the kingdom of our Father; I hope I
shall not stay long after you, if not called before. My soul is sick
of love. Nothing can satisfy it, but the full sight and enjoyment of
CHRIST. He now visits my soul, and causes it mightily to rejoice in
his salvation. How lovingly he hath dealt with me in other respects,
letters sent to other friends can best inform you. Haste, read, hear,
and join with them in giving thanks and praying for

     Your affectionate friend and brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXII.

                  _To Mrs. S――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. S――――_,

MY soul is now in an heavenly frame, swallowed up in GOD, and melted
down by the love of my dear LORD JESUS. It is almost too big to
speak. I will give it vent by writing to you. Our master hath been
exceeding gracious, and has shewn me several tokens for good, which
I desired of him in secret prayer. Last night, I think I received as
full satisfaction as I could desire, in respect to _my marriage_. I
believe what I have done, is of GOD; tho’ I know not when my heart
was more disengaged from earthly thoughts than now. I only desire,
that the dear JESUS may be glorified in me, whether it be by life or
by death. I depend on your sending me a particular account of affairs
at _Charles-Town_. I have wrote to many; you will hear how my letters
are received. I shall be glad to hear how it is with your own soul.
I beseech you to live near to CHRIST, and to keep up a holy walk with
GOD. Be inward with GOD in your duties. Trust and hang on GOD, even
when he hides himself from you. He will be your guide unto death.
Hunger and thirst daily after the righteousness of CHRIST. Be content
with no degree of sanctification. Be always crying out, “LORD, let me
know more of myself and of thee; O let me receive grace for grace of
thy dear Son.” This, at present, is the full desire of my soul. I am
persuaded the LORD will satisfy it. GOD is love; we cannot think too
highly of him; we cannot expect too great things to be done by him.
His right hand, I believe, will bring mighty things to pass. I am
now entering on a scene of trials. The LORD hath sent me on the seas
to prepare me for them. Not that I depend on any stock of grace
already received, I would look to CHRIST continually. But whither am
I running? I forget myself. I almost fancy, I am talking with you. I
have only room to acquaint you, that dear _J―――― S――――_ sits by me,
and cordially salutes you, with

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXIII.

                _To the Rev. Mr. S――――, Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

YOU have been very kind to me in many respects; but I have been
ungrateful to you, and infinitely more so to my gracious GOD. I have
not failed frequently to bemoan my unworthiness. Since I have been on
board, the LORD hath heard the voice of my weeping, and now fills my
soul with all peace and joy in believing. I have been much assisted
in composing sermons for the press. At present my soul is closely
adverting to GOD, who, I believe, will bring me safe to glory. My
bodily strength is much renewed. In short, I am comforted on every
side. Dear Sir, praise the LORD in my behalf. O let us magnify his
name together. I hope you feel what it is to have fellowship with the
Father and the Son, and experience the influences of the Holy Ghost,
in delivering your blessed master’s message. I salute Mr. _P――――_ and
your whole church. My request is, “Brethren, pray and give thanks for
us.”――When you write to _New-England_, pray remember me to all friends
in the kindest manner. That country, and the people, lie very near my
heart. I hope to be favoured with a line from you ere I return from
_England_. Great perils there await me; but JESUS CHRIST will send his
angel, and roll away every stone of difficulty. In his strength alone
is my trust, and for his sake and in his name, I subscribe myself,
reverend and dear Sir,

      Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer in the LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXIV.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Bethesda._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 18, 1741._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

YESTERDAY we humbled ourselves before GOD, and by prayer and fasting
sought for a blessing, and direction in all our affairs. I wish I
had kept family fasts at _Savannah_. Suppose you had one monthly at
_Bethesda_? You will see, by dear Brother _B――――_’s letter, the frame
of my mind. Since that, I have been a little in the valley, but the
LORD is my comforter. I hope I grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
myself, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST. My heart is much united to Messrs.
_W――――s_, tho’ we differ in some particulars. May GOD make us of
one mind, as well as heart. I shall make all possible haste back,
and remit money to you as often as I can. Mr. _P――――_ tells me, his
brother is to send you upwards of a hundred pounds, and I suppose
other supplies will be sent from the _Northward_. I have also wrote
to _Charles-Town_. I am persuaded GOD will not let you want. I would
not have any thing left undone, that is necessary for the family’s
comfortable subsistence. The LORD is our Shepherd, therefore we
shall not lack. I shall long to hear how the blessed JESUS deals with
you. He is wonderfully gracious unto me, and hath made this voyage
profitable to my soul. O my friend, my friend, the LORD be with you.
My love is firm to you at the bottom, tho’ sometimes it hath ebbed and
flowed; in heaven it will not be so. On earth it is needful it should;
otherwise, how should we learn to cease from man? But I am a worm
and no man, and deserve to be the outcast of all people. My eyes are
now ready to gush out with water. O the sovereign love of CHRIST in
chusing me! My dear friend, let us study to be holy even as he is holy,
and walk even as he also walked. Let these be your daily questions,
“Am I more like CHRIST? Am I more meek and patient? Does my practice
correspond with my knowledge, and am I a light to enlighten and
enflame all that are around me?” I could say more, but I think to
write again when I get on shore. GOD bless you and yours. I suppose
you have heard that Mr. _P――――_ sails with

       Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXV.

                  _To Mr. S―――― W――――, at Bristol._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741._

AND does my friend _W――――_ look again towards GOD? Never did the
Father with greater joy receive the returning prodigal, than I shall
embrace you in these unworthy arms, if you are alive to GOD. I trust
your late tepidity will now make you more fervent in spirit. I pray
GOD to give you a settlement in CHRIST, that you may be rooted and
grounded in love. My brother, the captain, gave me a particular
account of your soul. I hope he will yet appear for GOD; will you also
appear with him? Why should you strive to please a pleasure-taking
world? Why should you keep in league with the apparent enemies of GOD?
But no more of this. Let old things pass away, let all things become
new. I believe GOD suffered you to fall, because you thought more
highly of yourself than you ought to think. My love to all. I feel
a great union of soul with Mr. _W――――_; we differ in principles, but
I hope the LORD will make us of one mind. You must not be surprized,
if I publish an answer to Mr. _John W――――_’s sermon, entitled, _Free
Grace_. It is wrote in much love and meekness. Adieu for the present.
Give thanks on my behalf. The LORD hath dealt wonderously kind with,
dear Mr. _W――――_,

                      Yours eternally in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXVI.

                   _To Mr. T―――― S――――, in London._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Have kept your letter by me till now, that I might answer it on my
voyage. It speaks the language of a perplexed heart, and plainly shews
me, that satan loves to keep us in bondage. My dear Brother, I think
you have done wrong in holding your peace. I am sure you once felt
that freedom of soul, which you are a stranger to now. The way of duty
is the way of safety. Whatever you may say to the contrary, unless you
will give the lie to your own experiences, you must confess, that you
have indeed tasted of the good word of life. You should, therefore,
have went forwards, and not have turned back again, and thereby
plunged yourself into darkness; darkness that may be felt. Alas, you
have too eagerly embraced principles (I fear) contrary to the gospel
of CHRIST. You are aiming at a false voluntary humility, and are
returning back to the flesh pots of _Egypt_. I know my words will
have but little force with some, but I must deliver my soul. GOD was
once pleased to work upon you by my ministry, and therefore I am more
solicitous for your welfare. I know the advice you would give me is,
“_be still_.” I hope I am, so far as really to know the LORD; but yet
_I will strive_, yet will I walk in all the ordinances of GOD, and go
on from strength to strength till I come to appear before him in his
heavenly Zion. I write this, out of the fulness of my heart. Indeed I
love you, and the brethren; I am willing to be the servant of you all.
I am less than the least. However, I dare not embrace tenets that are
not agreeable to the form of sound words. Let me see you as soon as
may be after my arrival, and in the mean while accept of hearty love,
from

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXVII.

                           _To Mrs. A. D._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741._
  _My dear Sister_,

MY conscience almost reproaches me, that
I have not wrote to you often, nor full enough; accept this as an
acknowledgement of my fault. I am sorry for it. We are now about a
thousand miles off _England_. I hope this will provoke you to send me
a letter immediately after my arrival. I find _Luther_’s observation
to be true: “Times of reformation are times of confusion;” as yet the
churches in _America_ are quiet, but I expect a sifting time ere long.
My family in _Georgia_ was once sadly shaken, but now, blessed be GOD,
it is settled, and, I hope, established in the doctrines of grace.
Your name is precious among them. I wish you would send them a long
letter. Your book on _walking with GOD_ has been blessed to one Mr.
_B――――_, and others in _South-Carolina_. It hath also been serviceable
to a dear friend now with me, as also to myself. I cannot well tell
you what great things are doing abroad. I have a scene of sufferings
lying before me; I expect shortly to cry out with the spouse, “Look
not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked upon me,
my mother’s children were angry with me.” My LORD’s command, now, I
believe, is, “Take the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines;
for our vines have tender grapes.”――Help me by your prayers. It is an
ease thus to unbosom one’s self to a friend, and an instance of my
confidence in you. O, my dear Sister, I am less than the least of all
saints, I am the chief of sinners, and yet JESUS loves me, and sheds
his love abroad in my heart abundantly by the Holy Ghost. I have been
much assisted in composing some gospel sermons, which I intend for the
press. I have sought the LORD by prayer and fasting, and he assures
me, that he will be with me. Whom then should I fear? Hitherto we
have had an extraordinary passage, praise the LORD. Herewith I send
you a letter from one of the children which GOD has given me: He
will rejoice to receive a line from you. If possible, I hope, tho’
you are in the decline of life, to see you face to face before I
leave _England_. I should be glad to hear how you are as to worldly
circumstances; if I can help you in any degree, freely command

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXVIII.

                     _To T―――― K――――, at London._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741._
  _My dear Brother K――――_,

I Received your kind letter at _Savannah_, and though I hope to see
you face to face soon after you receive this, yet love to your dear
soul constrains me to write you an answer before I come on shore.

I find, since my departure, the brethren have fallen into errors.
Dear Brother _K――――_ will not be offended, if I say, “He, I fear, is
one of them;” for his letter bewrayeth him. My dear Brother, you say,
“You have been striving a long, long while, but to very little purpose,
&c.” By this, I suppose, you have left off the means, and fallen
into _stillness_; expecting now, that JESUS CHRIST will so work upon
your heart, that you shall not feel the least stirring of indwelling
corruption in your soul; in short, that you shall be completely
perfect: This was pretty near my case about six years ago, and now
I see why GOD suffered me thus to be tempted, “that I might be more
capable of succouring my brethren, now they are tempted.” My dear
Brother, let us reason together. “You have been striving (you say) a
long while, but to very little purpose.” And what then? must you be
therefore still, and strive no more? GOD forbid: No, you are yet to
wait at the pool. “Constantly attend on ordinances;” and who knows but
by-and-by the loving Saviour may pass by and visit your soul. Have you
not, in some degree at least, felt his divine power in the use of the
means? Why should not that encourage you to expect more in the same
way? But you say, “I find all that is of self is sin.” And do you
expect ever to do any thing, or to offer up to GOD one sacrifice,
without a mixture of sin in it? If you do, indeed you are building
a _spiritual Babel_. My dear Brother, even our most holy thoughts
are tinctured with sin, and want the atonement of the Mediator; and
therefore, if you leave off striving, because “whatever is of self
is sin,” you must never attempt to do any duty whatsoever again. Your
stillness hath as much a mixture of self in it, as your striving, and
if you proceed in this manner, you must become a professed _Quietist_.
Six weeks did satan keep me under this delusion, but the LORD helped
me in the hour of extremity: May he also help my dear Brother _K――――_!
Another error you seem to be fallen into is, “that a man cannot be a
christian, at least that he is a very weak one, so long as he finds
corruption stirring in his heart.” If I was to urge the seventh to
the _Romans_, you would say, St. _Paul_ only speaks of a man under
first-awakenings, and not of a converted man; but my dear Brother, did
you ever know a man, that was not really converted, delight in the law
of GOD after the inner man? And yet such an one the Apostle speaks of
in the latter part of that chapter. Be not deceived, we are to be holy
as CHRIST is holy; we are to receive grace for grace; every grace that
is in the blessed JESUS, is to be transplanted into our hearts; we are
to be delivered from the power, but not from the indwelling and being
of sin in this life. _Hereafter_, we are to be presented blameless,
without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. If you labour after
any other perfection here, you will labour in vain. St. _Paul_ had
attained no other, when he wrote to the _Philippians_, and to the
other churches: But my dear Brother _K――――_ seems to think, “I did
wrong in writing to Mr. _H――――_ to know his sentiments upon several
texts of scripture, and in sending for several of _Calvin_’s books.”
And why, my dear Brother, was this wrong? Why you say, “you think
it is contrary to St. _Paul_ in his Epistles, when he says, he would
not speak other men’s words;” but St. _Paul_ says no such thing: The
place you aim at, I believe, is _2 Cor._ x. 16. “And not to boast in
another man’s line, of things made ready to our hand.” My dear Brother,
examine the context, and you will find the Apostle means no more
than that he would not enter into other men’s labours, as ver. 15.
He would not preach where churches were already settled, but go where
the gospel had not been delivered. This, and this only, is the meaning
of the passage, which dear mistaken Mr. _K――――_ has wrongly quoted.
My dear Brother, did not St. _Paul_ bid _Timothy_ to give himself to
reading? What, if the Holy Spirit is to lead us into all truth, does
not the Holy Spirit make use of, and lead us by the means? Has he not
indited the scriptures? Has he not helped holy men to explain those
scriptures? And why may I not, in a due subordination to the Holy
Spirit, make use of those men’s writings? Has not my dear Brother
_K――――_ bought sermons? And why then does “He make use of other men’s
words?” O, my dear brother, you are in the wilderness; GOD bring you
safe out of it.

I suppose, because the Dissenters oppose some of your new principles,
you term them enemies; but, my dear Brother, though there are many
Christless talkers, and hypocritical formalists among the Dissenters,
as no doubt there are some such in the purest church under heaven; yet
many of them hold and practice the truth as it is in JESUS. But I have
done. Count me not your enemy, because I tell you the truth. I expect
that great numbers will look shy on me, for thus opposing what I think
to be error. Thus the _Galatians_ treated St. _Paul_; but I must be
tried every way. I could add a thousand kind things, but I hope you
shortly will have a personal interview with

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXIX.

               _To Mrs. J―――― F――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 25, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend_,

I Know you will rejoice at the receipt of this: You have abundant
reason; the LORD hath been wonderous kind. We are now flying on the
wings of the wind, and if it continues, we hope to be at _Cowes_ the
beginning of next week. Your kind presents were of great service to
my crazy body. The woman passenger has been serviceable in making
us bread; and in short, GOD has wonderfully ordered all things
for our great conveniency and comfort. O that my dear friends at
_Charles-Town_, may hereby be excited to thankfulness on our behalf.
I have frequently prayed for you both with my friends, and when in
secret before the LORD. Indeed you are seldom out of mind. Dear Mrs.
_F――――_, I believe GOD sent you to invite me to your house, and I
believe the LORD will plentifully reward both of you, for all your
works of faith and labours of love. I think henceforward I must call
you _Mary_, and your husband, I hope, will be truly stiled _James_ the
servant of the LORD. I trust you will both serve the LORD CHRIST, and
give yourselves up to the guidance of his blessed word and providences
day by day. It is a glorious privilege to be led by the spirit of GOD.
I think I have felt, and do feel, at this time, his sacred influences
upon my soul. My body is but weak, though better by much than when
I left _Charles-Town_; however, my soul hath confidence in GOD. The
archers will shoot sorely at me that I may fall; but GOD will cause
my bow to abide in strength, and my arms shall be strengthened by the
hands of the mighty GOD of _Jacob_. I need not ask for a continuance
of your prayers, nor you for mine. I hope we shall be always present
with each other in spirit, at the throne of grace. My dear friend,
adieu: All with me salute you. Write often to

         Your unworthy guest, but truly affectionate servant,
                   friend, and brother in the LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXX.

                  _To Mrs. F――――, in Charles-Town._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 25, 1741._

I Hope dear Mrs. _F――――_ will not be offended with these few lines;
they are written with a sincere desire to promote your welfare. I want
to see you entirely _dead to the world_, and alive to GOD. You have
been often convinced under the word; may it sink deep into your heart.
GOD, by the late fire, hath shewn you the vanity of all things here
below; henceforward set your affections on things above. You are old,
and at the head of a great family; you have sealed your promise to
lead a holy life, more than once, by receiving the symbols of the
blessed body and blood of CHRIST.

               _Henceforth let no profane delight
                Divide your consecrated soul;
                But give it CHRIST, who has the right,
                As Lord and Master of the whole._

Be not ashamed to own you have vowed never to dance again: Dear Mrs.
_F――――_, fear not contempt. What is it? only a little breath. Rest
not in duties; rest not in outward partial reformation.――He that is
in CHRIST, is a new creature. That old things may pass away, and all
things become new in your heart, is the hearty prayer of, Madam,

              Your sincere friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXXI.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. C――――, in Boston._

                              _On board the Minerva, Feb. 26, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

ACCEPT a few lines from one, who desires feelingly to stile himself,
less than the least of all. I hope you received my packet from
_Charles-Town_: What happened to me there, was only an earnest of
future trials. GOD hath blessed the reading of the prophecy of the
prophet _Jeremiah_ to my soul; as also the history of _Joseph_, and
hath let me see more into the covenant of redemption between the
Father and the Son: I am more and more in love with the _good old
Puritans_; I am pleased at the thoughts of sitting down hereafter with
the venerable _Cotton_, _Norton_, _Elliot_, and that great cloud of
witnesses, which first crossed the Western ocean for the sake of the
gospel, and faith once delivered to the saints. At present, my soul
is so filled, that I can scarce proceed. Dear Sir, GOD is with me of
a truth; he now gives me a feeling possession of himself: I bless his
holy name for sending me to sea; it is profitable both for soul and
body. I find the Psalmist’s words to be true, “The secret of the LORD
is with them that fear him.” O that I may walk humbly with my GOD! The
language of my soul is this:

                 _Correct me when I go astray,
                  And lead me in thy perfect way._

And now, dear Mr. _C――――_, I have in some measure unbosomed my heart.
What shall I say more? Pray for me both in public and private; give
thanks, as well as pray, especially for the mercies of this voyage.
Dear Sir, adieu till I come on shore, which I hope will be very
speedily, being now in soundings; then you shall hear again, GOD
willing, from

        Your truly affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― H――――._

                                           _London, March 25, 1741._
  _My dear Sir_,

I Wrote to you immediately on my coming on shore. We arrived at
_Falmouth_ last _Wednesday_ was sevennight, and got here the _Sunday_
following.――Blessed be GOD, we had a summer’s passage. Many of our
friends, I find, are sadly divided, and, as far as I am able to judge,
have been sadly misled. Congregations at _Moorfields_, and _Kennington
Common_, on _Sunday_, were as large as usual.――On the following week
days, quite contrary: Twenty thousand dwindled down to two or three
hundred. It has been a trying time with me. A large orphan family,
consisting of near a hundred, to be maintained, about four thousand
miles off, without the least fund, and in the dearest part of his
Majesty’s dominions; also, above a thousand pounds in debt for them,
and not worth twenty pounds in the world of my own, and threatened to
be arrested for three hundred and fifty pounds, drawn for in favour of
the Orphan house, by my late dear deceased friend and fellow-traveller
Mr. _S――――_. My Bookseller, who, I believe, has got some _hundreds_
by me, being drawn away by the _M――――ns_, refuses to print for me; and
many, very many of my spiritual children, who, at my last departure
from _England_, would have plucked out their own eyes to have given
to me, are so prejudiced by the dear Messrs. _W._’s dressing up the
doctrine of Election in such horrible colours, that they will neither
hear, see, nor give me the least assistance: Yea, some of them send
threatening letters, that GOD will speedily destroy me. As for the
people of the world, they are so imbittered by my _injudicious_,
and _too severe expressions_ against Archbishop _Tillotson_, and the
Author of the old _Duty of Man_, that they fly from me as from a viper;
and what is most cutting of all, I am now constrained, on account of
our differing in principles, publicly to separate from my dear, dear
old friends Messrs. _J――――_ and _C―――― W――――y_, whom I still love as
my own soul: But, through infinite mercy, I am enabled to strengthen
myself in the LORD my GOD. I am cast down but not destroyed, perplexed
but not in despair. A few days ago, in reading _Beza’s Life of Calvin_,
these words were much pressed upon me, “_Calvin_ is turned out of
_Geneva_, but, behold a new church arises!”――JESUS, the ever loving,
altogether lovely JESUS, pities and comforts me. My friends are
erecting a place, which I have called a _Tabernacle_, for morning’s
exposition. I have not, nor can I as yet, make any collections; but
let us not fear.――Our heavenly Father, with whom the fatherless find
mercy, will yet provide; let us only seek first the kingdom of GOD,
and his righteousness, and all other necessary things shall be added
unto us. In about a fortnight, though I scarce know an oak from a
hickery, or one kind of land from another, I am subpœna’d to appear
before parliament, to give an account of the condition of the province
of _Georgia_, when I left it. This, I suppose, is occasioned by
the party, which hath been so inveterate against the honourable the
trustees, whom they accuse of misemploying the public monies. The
event, which undoubtedly will be in favour of the trust, you may know
hereafter. In the mean while, believe me to be

                      Yours most affectionately,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXIII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― C――――._

                                           _London, March 25, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

HASTEN hither with all speed, and then we shall see what GOD intends
to do for and by us. It is a trying time now in the church.――The LORD
give us a due mixture of the lamb and lion. Some that have been led
astray, begin to recover. The LORD make way for his own truths. My
love to the _Colliers_, and all friends. Many, I suppose, will be shy.
I am become a monster even to several who were wrought upon by my
ministry; but it must needs be that offences should come: otherwise,
how should I learn to cease from man? Adieu; excuse brevity――Hasten,
and speak face to face with

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXIV.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                                           _London, April 10, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend_,

I Ordered Mr. _H――――_ to send you some sermons and accounts, some time
ago: I suppose he has done it. I have been at the Parliament-house;
the _Georgia_ affair was adjourned. The gentlemen seemed apprehensive
that my account of the colony, would have too much weight. It was
somewhat of a trial to be in the House. I then remembered what the
Apostle said, “We are become a spectacle to men and to angels.” My
appeal will come to nothing, I believe. I have waited upon the Speaker;
he received me kindly. I cannot yet determine when I shall see you. If
you fear, I hope you will pray for me. The LORD blesses my ministry.
Salute dear Mrs. _H――――_: I will write to her next; but you two are
one. The LORD be with you both. At present I am weak in body, and
therefore must beg leave to subscribe myself

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXXV.

                   _To Mr. S―――― M――――, at London._

                                          _Bristol, April 27, 1741._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

ON _Tuesday, April 22d_, I left _London_, and preached on _Wednesday_
and _Thursday_ morning at _Newbury_, to large congregations. On
_Friday_ evening I preached at _Bristol_, and have continued to
do so twice every day to great and affected auditories. I received
your kind letter, and thank you for it. I rejoice in the good news
from _New-England_. Last night, I rejoiced much in seeing a soul
wonderfully exult in GOD, just at the borders of death. Great
manifestations of the divine presence have attended my sermons. Praise
the LORD O my soul! I am glad to find Mr. _S――――_ goes on well. Pray
give my love to brother _G――――_. My body is sometimes weak, but my
soul rejoices in GOD my Saviour. I know not, whether I shall come
so soon as proposed to _London_. I find it necessary, through the
increase of awakened souls, to get a society-room built adjoining
to our new tabernacle. I pray GOD to fill it with his glory, and beg
leave to subscribe myself, dear Mr. _M――――_, Your affectionate friend,
brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXVI.

                        _To Mr. H―――― H――――._

                                          _Bristol, April 28, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

BLESSED be GOD for knitting us together in love. May it continue, and
increase till consummated in eternity! The LORD JESUS direct you. It
is now a trying time with the church. Our LORD is now chiefly wounded
in the house of his friends. The LORD keep us both from a party
spirit on one hand, and from too much rashness and positiveness on the
other. I speak thus, because you seem offended that some affirm, “That
there is no such thing as dominion over indwelling sin, nor rest from
working for life wholly.” Now this is certainly true in one sense. We
shall never have such a dominion over indwelling sin, as entirely to
be delivered from the stirring of it; and the greatest saint cannot be
assured, but some time or other for his humiliation, or punishment for
unfaithfulness, GOD may permit it to break out into some actual breach
of his law, and in a gross way too. Let us not be high-minded, but
fear. It is equally true, that we shall not rest wholly from working
for life. For whilst there is any part of us unregenerate, that
part will be always leading us to the old covenant. _Luther_ often
complained of the propensity of his heart this way. If we know
ourselves, we shall find it to be so with us; but I suppose you have
been tinctured with the doctrine of _sinless perfection_. No wonder
therefore you write thus. May GOD give you a right judgment in all
things, and enable you rightly to divide the word of truth! As for
_assurance_, I cannot but think, all who are truly converted must
know that there was a time in which they closed with CHRIST: But then,
as so many have died only with an humble hope, and have been even
under doubts and fears, though they could not but be looked upon
as christians; I am less positive than once I was, lest haply I
should condemn some of GOD’s dear children. The farther we go in the
spiritual life, the more cool and rational shall we be, and yet more
truly zealous. I speak this by experience. Dear brother _H――――_ will
not be angry with me. I hope, and believe, you pray for me. The LORD
JESUS carries me on. Many have been convinced at _London_. I preach
here twice daily, to large congregations, with great power. The LORD,
I believe, will yet bring mighty things to pass. I am, dear _H――――_,

        Your most affectionate brother in our dear LORD JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXVII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. S――――._

                                             _Bristol, May 1, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Am glad to hear by brother _M――――_, that the LORD is with you. May
you increase with all the increase of GOD. The more we do, the more
we may do for the dear LORD JESUS. He strengthens me here mightily.――I
am enabled to speak here with great power, rather greater than when
at _London_. My congregations are as large as usual, and they go
refreshed away. This is the LORD’s doings; may all that is within us
praise his holy name! Exhort the dear _London_ people to pray for us.
The LORD be with you all. Dear Sir, pray for

        Your affectionate brother and unworthy fellow-labourer
                             in our LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCLXXVIII.

                    _To Mr. S――――, at Worcester._

                                          _Gloucester, May 5, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

WITH this, I send you my answer to brother _Wesley_’s sermon, and my
account of the Orphan-house. I have seen your letter to Mr. _N――――_,
and thank you for espousing the cause of a poor despised minister of
JESUS CHRIST. I hope as I make advances in the spiritual life, I shall
show my zeal more and more tempered with true christian knowledge and
prudence. I would willingly have none of my wild fire mingled with
the sacred fire that comes down from GOD’s altar. I desire not only
to do things for GOD, but to do them in the best manner. I am a poor
unworthy sinner, and yet, (O sovereign grace!) the LORD works by me
day by day. At _Bristol_, error is in a great measure put a stop to.
The LORD manifested himself in the great congregation there, and doth
likewise here. Last night, we saw and felt his power. I have had the
pleasure of seeing dear Mr. _P――――_, and I long for that time when I
shall see you, Reverend Sir, and all the chosen of GOD in the kingdom
of heaven. But I desire to wait till my change shall come. Dear Sir,
be pleased to pray for me. I have prayed for you often. I am a weak
sinful worm. As such pray remember, Reverend Sir,

   Your affectionate though unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXIX.

                  _To Mr. Wm. W――――, at Edinburgh._

                                            _Bristol, May 16, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Received both your kind letters, and with this send you my hearty
thanks for them. I also thank you for your kind invitation of me to
_Scotland_. GOD only knows when I can come.――All I can say at present
is, I will come when the LORD permits. Sad tares have been sown here.
It will require some time to pluck them up. The doctrines of the
gospel are sadly run down, and most monstrous errors propagated. They
assert, “That the very in-being of sin must be taken out of us, or
otherwise we are not new creatures.” O dear Sir, exhort all to pray
for me, that I may be faithful to my LORD, and yet kept gentle in my
temper. At present, our dear LORD causes me to triumph in every place.
His gospel gets ground, and his power is manifested among us day by
day. The fields are white, every where ready unto harvest. Our LORD
I trust will gather his wheat into his heavenly garners. My kind
respects attend Mr. _M――――_ and Mr. _D――――_. Had I time I would write
a long letter to each. But I am interrupted. However, I am glad to
snatch a few moments to beg a continuance of your prayers for a poor
unworthy worm, and to assure you that I am, dear Sir,

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCLXXX.

                  _To Mr. E―――― E――――, at Sterling._

                                            _Bristol, May 16, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Owe you much love. Only want of time, prevents my writing to you
oftner. This morning I received a kind ♦letter from your brother
_Ralph_, who thinks it best for me wholly to join the associate
presbytery, if it should please GOD to send me into _Scotland_. This
I cannot altogether come into. I come only as an occasional preacher,
to preach the simple gospel to all that are willing to hear me, of
whatever denomination. It will be wrong in me to join in a reformation
as to church government, any further than I have light given me from
above. If I am quite neuter as to that in my preaching, I cannot
see how it can hinder or retard any design you may have on foot. My
business seems to be, to evangelize, to be a Presbyter at large. When
I shall be sent into your parts I know not. I write this, that there
may not be the least misunderstanding between us. I love and honour
the associate Presbytery in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. With this
I send them my due respects, and most humbly beg their prayers. But
let them not be offended, if in all things I cannot immediately fall
in with them. Let them leave me to GOD. Whatever light he is pleased
to give me, I hope I shall be faithful to it. Our dear and precious
master still carries me on. GOD enables me to fight my way through.
The gospel doctrines, I believe, will yet prevail. I feel a divine
power attending my ministrations. I preach twice daily, and am invited
to many places. I believe the LORD intends to keep me on this side the
water for some time. Blessed be GOD, all places are alike to me. O
dear Sir, pray for me.――I am a poor unworthy worm. I love you tenderly,
but am almost ashamed to subscribe myself

                  Your brother in the best of bonds,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘lettter’ replaced with ‘letter’


                           LETTER CCLXXXI.

                     _To D―――― A――――, in London._

                                            _Bristol, May 16, 1741._

I Am glad to receive a line once again from dear brother _A――――_. I
rejoice that GOD lets you see more and more into the corruptions of
your heart. The more perfect you are, the more will you see and bewail
your imperfections in thought, word, and deed; the more will you be
made to sing, “In the LORD alone, and not in myself, have I compleat
righteousness and strength.” The doctrine of electing love, is
precious to my soul. I am enabled to speak of it feelingly to others.
My soul is kept in peace and sweetness. Our LORD’s cause needs not
noise and rashness. I desire that none of my wild-fire may be mixed
with the pure fire of holy zeal coming from GOD’s altar. I think it my
duty to wait, to go on simply in preaching the everlasting gospel, and
I believe we shall yet see the salvation of GOD. Methinks, the cloud
begins to break off your mind; I pray GOD to keep you from extremes.
Brother _H――――_ is more and more enlightned; but withal, more and more
quickened every day. He finds there is no such thing as _sinless_
perfection, and yet is pressing after holiness of heart and life
rather more than ever. May GOD make my dear brother _A――――_ thus
minded! For indeed I love him in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. We have
had frequently sweet communion with GOD, and one another. I should
have rejoiced to have conversed with you at _Bristol_. This is my
comfort, yet a little while and we shall converse in the kingdom of
heaven, for ever and ever. My soul is waiting for this salvation. I
know not when I shall go to _Axminster_. When I do, you shall have
timely notice. GOD blesses my ministry, wherever he sends me. I am
invited to fresh places daily. Dear Mr. _A――――_, I, even worthless I,
subscribe myself,

            Yours most affectionately in the loving JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXXII.

                        _To Mr. I―――― C――――._

                                            _Bristol, May 18, 1741._
  _Dear Brother C――――_,

I Received your letter this morning, and am just setting out for
_Wiltshire_. The LORD hath been much with us. Yesterday I preached
three times. At every sermon, a sweet melting was observed in the
congregation. Last night I gave your sister the sacrament; she is
recovering. I afterwards, administered the sacrament at Mr. _T――――_’s,
and had a love feast. JESUS was in the midst of us. I know not
but I may come towards _London_ next week. I wonder not at your
heaviness.――Before every increase of your work, you must expect some
trials. Humblings are necessary for your spirit, and mine. I return
my love to all. I must away. Brother _H――――_ rejoices in spirit, and
joins with me, who am,

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCLXXXIII.

                         _To the Rev. Mr. J._

                                            _Bristol, May 23, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Bless GOD for making any thing of mine useful to your soul. May
the blessed JESUS breathe upon you day by day, and make you eminently
useful to the church of GOD. I think you write with a kind of
prophetic spirit. The LORD only knows how he will be pleased to
dispose of me. Great afflictions I am sure of having, and a sudden
death, blessed be GOD, will not be terrible. I know that my redeemer
liveth. I every day long to see him, that I may be free from the
remainder of sin, and enjoy him without interruption for evermore. I
desire patiently to wait, till my blessed change shall come. The LORD
hath been with me here. There is a great awakening in _Wiltshire_,
and the work is most wonderfully carried on in _New-England_. I hope
to send you a letter, shortly, that will rejoice your heart. I leave
_Bristol_, and go through _Wiltshire_ to _London_ next _Monday_.――I
then purpose going to _Staffordshire_, and then through _Wales_
to _Scotland_. A wider door than ever is opened for preaching the
everlasting gospel. I have now only time to beg your prayers, and to
assure you that I am

       Your most affectionate though weak and unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXXIV.

                _To Mr. I―――― R――――, at Philadelphia._

                                            _Bristol, May 23, 1741._
  _Dear I――――_,

I Rejoice to find, that you see, feel, and bewail, the plague of your
heart. May the LORD shew it you more and more! It will excite your
love to the dear LORD JESUS more fervently.――I return my love to your
sister. I thought ere now she had been with JESUS. I believe, she
has the grace of GOD in truth, and therefore our LORD will make her
conqueror over all. I am glad to hear of the success of the gospel in
_Boston_. It is a gathering time there, but a winnowing time with us
here. All is ordered for the good of the church, by CHRIST JESUS: Let
us, my dear brother, keep close to him in this and every trying time.
We shall find but few, very few, true followers of the Lamb of GOD.
May you and I be in the happy number! GOD is pleased to give success
to the word preached. Though I am opposed much, JESUS is my strength.
The LORD will enable me to fight his battles. My love to _Peggy_, and
all that love JESUS. Forget not to pray for

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXXV.

                           _To Mr. T――――._

                                            _Bristol, May 23, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Am glad to receive a letter from you. I was fearful, lest I had
done something to offend you. I thank you and the other gentlemen for
their kind invitation of me to _Scotland_. I believe it will be near
three months before I can see _Edinburgh_. On _Monday_ I set out for
_London_: then I purpose, GOD willing, to go into _Essex_, and then
to return through _Bristol_ and _Wales_ in my way to you. I intreat
all the brethren to pray for me, that I may come in the fulness of the
blessing of the gospel of CHRIST. I am a poor, weak, unworthy worm.
GOD hath been with me here, and in _Gloucestershire_. In _Wiltshire_
there is a great awakening. Abroad in _New-England_ the work goes on
wonderfully. O dear Sir, never was such a weak wretch sent on such an
important errand. I have many trials of various kinds. JESUS supports
me; JESUS makes me more than conqueror. He is a dear and a tender
master. Dear Sir, help me to praise him. I will write to all the
gentlemen that wrote to me, if I can any way redeem time. In the mean
while, be pleased to remember me to them in the kindest manner, and
believe me to be

   Your affectionate though unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCLXXXVI.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Savannah._

                                             _London, June 1, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

I Received a short letter from you, but it was dated in _January_
last.――I have sent several to _Georgia_, and lately also a parcel of
things for the children. GOD appears much in our congregations. We
seldom or never have a dry meeting. As to outward things, I never was
more embarrassed; but my consolations are equivalent. Praise the LORD,
O my soul! I am apprehensive of no opposition from the government. I
have waited on the Speaker. He treated me kindly, and assured me that
there would be no persecution in this king’s reign: they know I am
loyal from principle, but I believe I shall yet be greatly humbled.
The story of _Joseph_ in the prison, and _David_ in his troubles
before he came to the throne, has been much and comfortably pressed
upon my soul. I hope you enjoy peace! May the LORD bless you and the
whole household. I am sometimes enabled to pray with great faith for
you all. The LORD will yet provide. I am to preach thrice to day. It
is now past five in the morning. I am going to the tabernacle lately
erected for a morning lecture. We have sweet meetings, blessed be GOD!
In the bowels of our common JESUS, I subscribe myself

                           Yours eternally,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCLXXXVII.

                    _To Mr. I. C――――, at Bristol._

                                             _London, June 3, 1741._

I Have enjoyed the especial presence of GOD ever since I came to
_London_. I preach three times daily. The LORD is remarkably with me.
Congregations increase. I am going to have a society-room joined to
the tabernacle. The LORD is really on our side.――O let us be meek and
quiet! O let us wait, and we shall see the salvation of GOD. I preach
daily at _Deptford_. Our dear master helps me to preach and pray with
great power. Your ministry hath been blessed. Let us both give all the
glory to everlasting Love. Salute the dear brethren. Remember me most
kindly to all in _Wine-street_.

                   Ever yours in the blessed JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCLXXXVIII.

                        _To Mr. R―――― E――――._

                                             _London, June 4, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Have now a little time to myself. I must improve it and answer your
kind letter. Blessed be GOD, for enabling me to write any thing, that
may be of service to his church, and of comfort to your soul. Glory
be to our dear and common LORD, his cause here succeeds. Truth gets
ground. The LORD strengthens me mightily. His power is manifested in
our congregations. Conversion work is going on apace among us. I am
not yet determined, about the exact time of coming to _Scotland_:
but I believe, I shall be with you in about three months. I can’t but
think the associate presbytery, are a little too hard upon me. If I
am neuter as to the ♦particular reformation of church government till
I have further light, it will be enough. I come simply to preach the
gospel, and to be received only as an occasional itinerant preacher
by all, and not to enter into any particular connection whatever.
The LORD, I hope, will order my goings in his ways. I desire to hear
frequently from you. I have need of your prayers. My trials are great,
my comforts far greater. I am a poor worm, and yet JESUS delights to
honour me. We are likely to have settled societies in several places.
JESUS rides on from conquering to conquer. I am, Reverend and dear Sir,

        Your unworthy fellow-labourer and affectionate brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘parcular’ replaced with ‘particular’


                           LETTER CCLXXXIX.

                                             _London, June 6, 1741._
  _My Brother H―――― H――――_,

I Do assure you, that my heart is as your heart. I am quite sick of
_Christless consenters_. They talk, and that is all. I (like you) am
heartily despised by most of them. I am resolved to open against their
luke-warmness, and worldly-mindedness. May GOD open my mouth wide when
I come to _Wales_. Outward enemies are now more quiet. Enemies within
the church, carnal professors, and self-righteous Pharisees, most try
us. Let us not fear, JESUS CHRIST will give us the victory over all.
GOD mightily strengthens me. Our congregations are very large and
solemn. I never had greater freedom in preaching. GOD enables me to
cast all my care upon him, with a full assurance that he careth for
me. You need not fear my believing any reports to your disadvantage.
I love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. I was not in the least
offended, when _B―――― H――――_ wrote me word that “you thought in some
things I did not act as a _little child_.” The more open you are with
me the better. If nature and pride rise in my heart, I will go to
JESUS, abhor myself, and pray for my dear reprovers. All that I can
say is, that I desire to be _a very little child_. All things are
possible with JESUS CHRIST. He is wonderfully kind to me. Truth, I
believe, will prevail. I want to see you face to face. Satan does not
love that CHRIST’s ministers should come together. I wish you could
come up immediately, and stay at _London_ whilst I am in the country:
or rather go and preach at _B――――l_, _Gloucester_, and _Wiltshire_,
for about a fortnight, and then come up to _London_. This, I believe,
will be best. About that time, GOD willing, I shall return from
_Essex_, and then we can consult what is best to be done for the
cause of our dear master. O JESUS is love! I am glad to hear brother
_Rowl――d_ is with you. Go on in the strength of our dear LORD, and
you shall see satan like lightning fall from heaven. Times are not yet
dark enough for the dawning of a thorough reformation. At even-tide
GOD speaks. My love to all that follow JESUS CHRIST with an unfeigned
simplicity. May the LORD hide your precious soul under the shadow of
his almighty wings! Cease not to pray for

                   Yours eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCXC.

             _To the Rev. Mr. D――――, at Dedham in Essex._

                                             _London, June 6, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

MULTIPLICITY of business has prevented my answering your kind letter.
However, I have often borne you upon my heart before the LORD. Your
case, methinks, is somewhat like that man of GOD, _J. Bunyan_’s. He
was often so depressed with a sense of sin in the pulpit, that he has
been tempted to hold his peace. This has been my case also both in
public and in private. I find the best way is to press forward, and to
look up to JESUS CHRIST. He is faithful to his promises. I write but
short, having but little time, and because I hope soon to see you in
_Essex_. I pray GOD to clear up your evidences, and give you no rest
till he fills you with a full assurance of faith. Our LORD rides on
triumphantly here. He enables me to go on from conquering to conquer.
I am a poor weak unworthy worm. As such, be pleased to remember,
Reverend and dear Sir,

       Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer in the gospel,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXCI.

                           _To Mrs. R――――._

                                             _London, June 6, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. R._,

I Have been much hindred in answering your letter. Perhaps you have
expected too much comfort from man. That comfort is alone lasting,
which comes from GOD. I know not your experiences, and therefore
cannot so well judge of your case: however, I would have you press
forward, and labour after a full assurance of faith. Judge not
yourself by others joys and comforts. Look not too much upon the
happiness you think others may enjoy. This may lead you to repine
and murmur against GOD. Look to yourself, and to CHRIST. Remember,
you deserve nothing, and therefore he does you no wrong. Remember
also, that he is full of love, and therefore in his own due time will
manifest himself to your soul. That you may patiently tarry the LORD’s
leisure, and be blessed with abundance of peace, is the hearty prayer
of, dear Mrs. _R――――_,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXCII.

                           _To Mr. K――――._

                                             _London, June 8, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Like your last letter best. There is one thing you still lack, “to
be convinced of unbelief.” By faith, and not by works, are you to be
justified in the sight of GOD. Make use of the means. You must take
care that you do not rest in them. You must not think any thing you
can do, will in the least recommend you to the favour of GOD; and yet
you must strive, as if you were to be saved by your striving. The only
cause of our acceptance with GOD lies at the feet of sovereign mercy,
through CHRIST. Entreat the LORD to give you faith, and who knows
but he may have mercy upon you. Remember you are a poor sinner, and
deserve nothing. That GOD may reveal his dear Son in you, is the
hearty prayer of

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXCIII.

                 _To Mr. J―――― C――――, at Kingswood._

                                             _London, June 8, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

HOW sweetly does providence order all
things for us! Just before yours came, I was resolved to send you
20 _l._ to begin the society-room at
_Kingswood_. Mrs. _C――――_ gives it, and I
believe will make it up fifty. This gentlewoman hath been made happily
instrumental in relieving me out of my late distress. You know how I
was threatened to be arrested, soon after my arrival, for above three
hundred pounds, due on account of the Orphan-house in _Georgia_, and I
do not know but a writ was actually taken out. This drove me to my
knees. GOD gave me to wrestle, with strong
cryings and many tears, both before and after I went to rest――I could
plead with him that it was not for myself but his poor. The example of
_Professor Frank_ encouraged me to pray, tho’ I found he ventured only
week by week; but my situation in such a foreign climate constrained
me to run upon larger arrears.――GOD was pleased to give me an answer
of peace. Having as I thought a full assurance of immediate help
from some quarter or another, I went to sleep most comfortably. Early
the next morning a friend came to me to enquire, if I knew where a
gentlewoman of his acquaintance might put out three or four hundred
pounds. I replied, let her lend it to me, and in a few months, GOD
willing, she shall have it again.――Upon being acquainted with my
circumstances, she most chearfully sent me the sum I wanted, and thus
my enemies were disappointed of their hope. Praise the LORD, O my
soul!――But to return. I would have you lay the foundation immediately,
but take care of building too large or too handsome. Notwithstanding
my present embarrassments, who knows, but it may be in my power
to discharge my Orphan-house debt, and make collections here for
_Kingswood-school_ too? When I could get no assistance at all from my
old friends and spiritual (prejudiced) children, and was almost quite
pennyless, and left to sit alone like a sparrow upon the house-top, a
serious person, whom I never saw or ♦heard of, came the other day and
put a guinea into my hand. At receiving it, something as it were said
to me, “Cannot that GOD who sent this person to give thee this guinea,
make it up fifteen hundred?” As I told a friend immediately, to whom I
ran down, so I shall tell you; I doubt not but this will be the case.
My debt is all for GOD, and contracted in providing for the fatherless
and widow. As to the work here, though perhaps I may be blamed by some
for venturing so far, blessed be GOD, it goes on sweetly. All things
happen for the furtherance of the gospel. I have wrote brother _S――――_
to let you have twenty pounds.

                   Yours eternally in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘heared’ replaced with ‘heard’


                            LETTER CCXCIV.

              _To the Rev. Mr. S――――, at Charles-Town._

                                             _London, June 9, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Wrote you a few lines lately from _Bristol_. Since that, I have
had the pleasure of receiving a letter from you; for which I thank
you heartily. What Mr. _P――――_ brings with him, will inform you how
affairs stand here. Blessed be GOD, the word runs and is glorified.
The heat of the battle is now, I hope, pretty well over. GOD is
pleased to give me great power, and to strengthen me both in body
and soul. Our congregations are large and awful. We generally see and
feel much of the divine presence in the sanctuary. Many are pricked
to the heart. I have three truly experienced young men that joined
me. Affairs being somewhat settled here, I am going a long journey
of several months, thro’ several counties in _England_, _Wales_,
and _Scotland_. The door was never opened wider for my preaching the
everlasting gospel. I am glad to hear by Mrs. _S――――_, &c. of your
faithfulness to our common LORD.――O, dear Sir, what are we that we
are called out to speak in his great name! Let us never fear suffering
for owning his eternal truths.――The witnesses cannot be slain ’till
they have finished their testimony. At present here is no great fear
of opposition from the men in power; tho’ I hear the House of Lords
intend to give a hearing to my appeal. However it be, I am easy.
The LORD JESUS over-rules every thing for the good of his church. I
suppose I cannot come over to you ’till about next Spring. In the mean
while, tho’ absent in body, I am present with you in spirit, and am,
reverend and dear Sir,

             Your very affectionate, but unknown brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXCV.

                  _To Mr. J―――― P――――, in Georgia._

                                             _London, June 9, 1741._
    _Dear brother P――――_,

I Am sorry to hear you are still in darkness. Let the little light
you have, make you hold up your head, and think not of changing your
station without a proper call. We are apt to place our happiness
in places, and often think we do not please GOD, because we do not
please ourselves. But I find the fault is in the heart, not the place.
Wait, therefore, my dear brother, still patiently upon the LORD. Who
knows, but by and by JESUS CHRIST may lift up the light of his blessed
countenance upon your soul? Why should you doubt it? My dear brother,
CHRIST is love. He tries, but yet supports me; nay, makes me more than
conqueror thro’ his love. You will hear by other letters, how it goes
with the church in _England_. She is shaken, but it is only that she
may be the more settled. My love to your wife. I hope you find her
an help-meet for you. May the GOD of _Abraham_, _Isaac_ and _Jacob_,
bless, preserve, and keep you. May you both walk in the comforts of
the Holy Ghost, and be edified; and may GOD give you hearts to remember

    Your affectionate friend, and brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXCVI.

               _To the Rev. Mr. F――――, at Southampton._

                                            _London, June 13, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

JUST now I received your kind letter, and the generous benefaction of
you and your friends for the Orphan-house. It came very opportunely,
and strengthens my faith in the blessed JESUS. I find he will help
me by ways I know not. O, dear Sir, the love of GOD to such an
unworthy worm quite amazes me. Surely, if I did not stand up for
free distinguishing grace, the very stones would cry out against me.
Blessed be our glorious _Emmanuel_, the gospel runs and is glorified.
A wonderful power attends the word preached. Every day, I believe,
some or other are pricked to the heart. I have also glad tidings from
abroad. In _New-England_ there is an extraordinary work of GOD. I hope
the dear JESUS will set the whole world in a flame. Dear Sir, help me
with your prayers. The archers shoot sore at me that I may fall, but
the LORD is my helper. I hope my thanks will find acceptance with your
other friends, who joined in helping my poor Orphans. Good measure
pressed down and running over, may the LORD return into your bosoms.
Dear Sir, I pray GOD to make you a flaming fire, and fill you with a
holy burning zeal for promoting our dear Redeemer’s kingdom. I find
but few truly zealous. The love of too, too many is waxed cold. I
thank you, dear Sir, for encouraging me, and beg leave to subscribe
myself, reverend and dear Sir,

              Your affectionate brother in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXCVII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. H――――._

                                            _London, June 13, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Received your kind letter. You do not know, and therefore think too
highly of me. “Less than the least of all,” shall be my motto still.
Providence is pleased to prevent my leaving _London_ on _Monday_ next.
I must necessarily defer my journey to _Hertfordshire_ and _Essex_,
till the _Monday_ following.――I approve of the circuit you have
fixed, but I chuse to preach at each place twice. Dear Sir, I most
heartily thank you for promising me your assistance in respect to the
orphans. I am persuaded our LORD will be well pleased. He gives me
great encouragement. We daily feel and see his presence in the great
congregation. I hear glorious news from abroad: _New-England_ is in a
holy flame. O that we at home, may be stirred up to spend ourselves,
and be spent, for the good of souls! Dear Sir, pray that such a mind
may be given to

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCXCVIII.

                _To the Rev. Mr. S――――, at Worcester._

                                            _London, June 13, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Thank you heartily for your last kind letter: As you are so aged and
infirm, I take it as an especial favour, that you are pleased to write
to me. You need make no apology, reverend Sir, for your plain dealing:
I love those best, who deal most sincerely with me. Whatever errors I
have been, or shall be guilty of in my ministry, I hope the LORD will
shew me, and give me grace to amend. This is the language of my heart;

                 _Correct me when I go astray,
                  And lead me in the perfect way._

I also thank you, dear Sir, for your kind benefaction. My arrears
upon the Orphan-house are yet large; but I hope ere long the LORD
will enable me to pay them all. At present, I am kept from doubting.
Unworthy as I am, JESUS CHRIST is yet with me, and is pleased daily to
strengthen me both in soul and body. My ministry (for ever adored be
sovereign grace) is attended with a continual power. I am shortly
going a large circuit, perhaps as far as _Scotland_. Dear Sir, let
your prayers follow after me.――I am a poor, weak, unworthy worm; as
such be pleased to remember, reverend and dear Sir,

          Your obedient, though unworthy brother and servant
                         in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCXCIX.

                  _To Mr. J―――― C――――, at Bristol._

                                           _Hertford, July 1, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

THE LORD has been with me greatly, ever since I left _London_.――I have
been enabled to preach twice every day, and to ride several miles.
The congregations have been every where very large. GOD’s presence has
accompanied the word. People’s hearts have been enlarged. Within these
few days, we have collected near a hundred pounds for the poor orphans.
Numbers of souls, I believe, are under convictions. In some places we
have had near ten thousand hearers. Invitations are so pressing, that
I purpose going another circuit to _Bedford_, and to preach in the
counties round about for near a fortnight, and then return to _London_.
I hope the LORD is with you; I am somewhat weak in body, but sweet and
comfortable in my soul. Dear _J――――_ joins with me in love to you and
all. Pray for,

                       Yours in the best bonds,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCC.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Savannah._

                                        _Colchester, July 12, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

I Have not heard from you since you wrote last _January_. I have
been a circuit into _Hertfordshire_, _Essex_, _Bedfordshire_,
_Cambridgeshire_, and _Suffolk_. I have been enabled to preach twice
daily, and to ride several miles. Congregations have been surprisingly
large; the word is attended with power, and the alarm in the country
rather greater than ever. Contributions arise and increase. You are
all much upon my heart. GOD will yet provide for you. I write this
in great haste. GOD gives me much of his presence. I am more and more
convinced, that evangelizing is my proper business at present. GOD
gives me great access every where. The LORD be with you all, Amen and
Amen! To the best of my knowledge, I have neglected no opportunity of
writing. I am

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER [CCC.]

                   _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at London._

                                        _Coggeshall, July 13, 1741._

I Received your letter at _Bury_; but cannot think matters are quite
ripe, or you duly qualified for settling a church. GOD lets me see
more and more, that I must evangelize. I find you are for settling:
do as GOD shall direct, I am easy. I only wish you may find settled
persons to be your assistants. Without this, a church cannot be
rightly ordered. I have no freedom, but in going about to all
denominations. I cannot join with any one, so as to be fixed in any
particular place. Every one hath his proper gift. _Field-preaching_ is
my plan: In this I am carried as on eagles wings. GOD makes way for me
every where. The work of the LORD increases. I am comforted night and
day. O free grace to such an hell-deserving sinner! I pray GOD to give
you a right judgment in all things. I am, dear brother _H――――_,

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCCI.

                    _To Mrs. D――――, at Gransden._

                                            _London, July 17, 1741._
  _My dear Sister_,

I Bless GOD that I saw you at _Gransden_. The LORD was with us, and
has been with me the remaining part of my journey. We shall yet see
greater things than these. Wonderful things from abroad. The inclosed
will shew you, how desirous my family is of corresponding with you.
Pray write to my dear little orphans, boys and girls. GOD, I hear,
hath been working powerfully upon their hearts. I would have you also
write to Mr. _J―――― B――――_, a converted planter; to Mrs. _B――――_,
his kinswoman, who has lately received the assurance of faith; to
Mr. _C――――_, a dear baptist minister; to Mrs. _S――――_, who is carried
on the wings of faith and love; and to my dear Mr. _H――――_, who is
Superintendant of the Orphan-house affairs. You will excuse this
freedom. I am willing your usefulness should be as extensive as may
be. May the LORD bless you ever, more and more. I expect to go to
_Scotland_ shortly. A ship will soon sail towards _Georgia_. Write
soon, dear Mrs. _D――――_, to

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCII.

                 _To Mr. G―――― H――――, in Gloucester._

                                            _London, July 18, 1741._
  _My dear Friend_,

GOD has mightily blessed my journey in the country. Thousands, and
ten thousands, have flocked to hear the word. It was attended with
power, and near a hundred and eighty pounds were collected for the
Orphan-house. I know you will give thanks on my behalf. On _Thursday_
morning, GOD willing, I hope to embark for _Scotland_: I am persuaded
the LORD calls me thither. Invitations, both from the _Seceders_, and
others that do not secede from the _Kirk_, are very strong. I should
be glad of a line next post. It is now near eleven at night. I hope my
friends will accept my thanks for their kind benefactions to the dear
orphans, and with their prayers follow, dear Mr. _H――――_,

                     Ever yours in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCIII.

                        _To Mr. B―――― S――――._

                                          _Lewisham, July 23, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

THOUGH I have but little time, yet I must redeem a little to answer
your kind letter. GOD is doing great things, both at home and abroad.
The inclosed will in some measure inform you. Every day our LORD
appears for us in the great congregations. Weak as I am in myself, the
LORD is my strength. O, dear Sir, I am a worm and no man; I deserve
to be the outcast of the people, and yet the LORD delights to honour
me. Free, free grace! I long to be above, that I may praise GOD as
I desire. In about two days I hope to embark for _Scotland_. I will
come and visit you when providence permits. In the mean while, I beg
that you will pray that the glorious JESUS would bless all my poor
endeavours to promote his glory! My love to all that love the dear
Emmanuel. In his great name, I subscribe myself

                Your affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCIV.

                 _To Mr. G―――― H――――, at Gloucester._

                                          _Lewisham, July 23, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend_,

I Thought to have embarked this morning for _Scotland_, but am
likely to be detained a day or two. I must therefore send you a line.
Wonderful things is the LORD doing for me. In the country I meet with
surprising success. In _London_ I see such things that I never saw
in _England_ before. A mighty power almost continually accompanies
the word. The LORD JESUS is pleased to strengthen me very much in the
inner man. O, my dear friend, give thanks for, and pray that I may
walk humbly with my GOD. The LORD be with you and yours. I hope both
you and dear Mrs. _H――――_ do keep close to GOD. My love to all that
love the dear LORD JESUS. GOD willing, you shall have a line from
_Scotland_. Wonderful news is come from abroad, which will ere long
rejoice your heart, and cause you to give thanks in behalf of, my dear
Mr. _H――――_,

                     Ever yours in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCCV.

                    _To Mr. T――――, at Colchester._

                                          _Lewisham, July 23, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

PROVIDENCE detaining me one day more, I snatch a few moments to
answer your kind letter, and to return Mr. _A――――_ thanks for his kind
present. How good is the blessed JESUS to me the chief of sinners!
He takes care both of my body and soul. His power has attended me
lately, more than ever it did before in _England_. GOD’s right hand is
bringing mighty things to pass. I earnestly intreat our LORD, that you
may live above the world, and be dead to all things here below. Dear
Sir, there is nothing like a life of faith. It is a glorious thing to
be able to say, “Not I live, but CHRIST liveth in me.” Then, are we
christians indeed, when we come to live on the invisible realities of
another world. This, and this only, is true and undefiled religion.
May GOD make you a lively partaker thereof. I hope my kind respects
will find acceptance with Messrs. _V――――_, _D――――_, _J――――_, and all
friends. Fail not to pray for

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCVI.

                           _To Mr. B――――._

                                         _Greenwich, July 24, 1741._
  _My very dear B――――_,

TO-MORROW, GOD willing, I embark for _Scotland_, and hope to redeem
time abroad to answer my dear lambs letters: They rejoiced me
exceedingly. What I have done with yours, the inclosed will shew. Pray
be particular in your accounts. Much good has been done by those sent
already. You cannot tell how many hearty prayers are put up for you
all, daily. May they enter into the ears of the LORD of _Sabaoth_!
The work is beginning afresh in _England_. The Holy Ghost descends in
a glorious manner, amidst the congregation. Weak, unworthy as I am,
JESUS CHRIST works in and by me. O sovereign free grace! I have sent
the letter to Mrs. _D――――_. I have lately seen her. Her conversation
is as weighty as her letters. You will receive more from her, I hope,
before it be long. I believe you are where GOD would have you to be.
I despair not of seeing your mouth opened remarkably for GOD. O that
the dear JESUS may bless you, and the whole houshold! I should rejoice
to see you, but GOD, I believe, will detain me here the Winter.
Mr. _P――――_’s brother is to pay for the use of the Orphan-house
seventy-five pounds. Shortly I hope to send you fresh supplies. In the
mean while I assure you all, that you are constantly upon my heart.
My head pains me; good night. The LORD be with you all. Expect to hear
again very speedily from, dear Brother _B――――_,

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCVII.

               _To Mr. I―――― B――――, at South-Carolina._

                                         _Greenwich, July 24, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

WITH much pleasure I received your kind letter. Blessed be GOD, even
the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who I trust hath begotten you,
and called you out of darkness into his marvellous light. What an
honour is it, that we should be counted worthy to suffer the least
degree of reproach for his great name sake? I am ashamed to think how
little I do, or suffer for him. O free grace! sovereign and electing
love! how sweet to the soul, who really feels the power of it! May we
walk worthy of that holy vocation wherewith we are called! I hear your
brother is dead; happy soul! you and I shall go and see him by and by.
I thank you heartily for your kindness to the dear orphans. I am sure
GOD will amply repay you. The LORD be with you and yours. I must away
to the ship bound for _Scotland_. I will answer dear Mrs. _B――――_’s
letter, when I get on board. Adieu. O pray for

                     Ever yours in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCVIII.

                _To Mr. I―――― F――――, at Charles-Town._

                                         _Greenwich, July 24, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. F――――_,

I Rejoice to hear the LORD is carrying on a good work in your soul.
I hope you will not think all is done, because you have been baptized
and received into full communion. I know too too many that “make
a CHRIST of their adult baptism,” and rest in that, instead of the
righteousness of the blessed JESUS. GOD forbid that you should so
learn CHRIST. O my dear friend, seek after a settlement in our dear
LORD, so that you may experience that life which is hid with CHRIST in
GOD. _Dear Mrs. F――――_, I thank you heartily for your kind letter. It
rejoices my soul to hear, that you and Mr. _F――――_ are going on hand
in hand to heaven. This is the sacred end of marriage; to be helpers
of each other in the great things of GOD. I am not yet entered into
that state. I am looking up to CHRIST, and shall wait his direction.
The gospel runs, and is glorified. The work is beginning a fresh in
_England_. Never was my preaching attended with so great power on this
side the water. Our LORD pours his comforts into my soul, and rejoices
me with the glad news I hear from your parts. May you all increase and
multiply in every good word and work. My most tender love to all. As
fast as possibly I can, each shall hear from, my dear friends,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCIX.

                     _To Mr. H――――, at Georgia._

                                         _Greenwich, July 24, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

BEFORE the boat comes to take me down to the ship, I would write you
a line or two. I greatly rejoice to hear that you live in love. But I
shall not be surprised, if, after this remarkable work of the spirit,
you meet with some trials. But fear not: we are all in the Mediator’s
hands. I find all things work together for my good, and so I am sure
you will. My dear friends, I know you sympathize with me.――Indeed, I
also do with you. My dear, dear family, you are continually upon my
heart. I redeem a moment or two as often as I can to write to you.
GOD only knows how I love and long after you in the bowels of the
ever-blessed JESUS. O may you lean on his bosom, and may his banner
over you be love. Adieu! for the present. I must soon away to the ship.
I have ordered hats and shoes for the children, and intend sending
brother _H――――_’s order and other things, with some cash, very shortly.
But the arrears hang on me yet. My LORD bears my burden; may he bear
all yours for you! I am persuaded he will. With great tenderness I
subscribe myself, dear Mr. _H――――_,

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCCX.

                  _To Mrs. S――――, at Charles-Town._

                      _In a boat going to Gravesend, July 24, 1741._
  _Dear Mrs. S――――_,

I Am now in a boat, in order to embark for _Scotland_. I have
the conveniency of writing upon a trunk, and therefore cannot be
easy without sending you a line. I rejoice to hear that you are
carried upon the wings of love. Methinks I see you sitting under the
Redeemer’s shadow with great delight, and exalting his free grace in
plucking you as a brand out of the fire. O when shall we go to heaven,
that we may praise GOD for what he hath done for our poor souls! The
LORD is better to me than ever. Conviction, and conversion, both in
town and country, are beginning again. The divine presence is much
manifested in our assemblies. Blessed be the LORD, who is also working
with you. The spiritual prosperity of the orphan family, rejoices my
heart. GOD will ere long, I believe, make a separation between the
precious and the vile. Poor Mr. _G――――_, Commissary _G――――d_, and
Chief Justice _W――――_, bitter, bitter, though unsuccessful persecutors,
what will become of you? O that GOD may grant them repentance unto
life! What reason have you and I, dear Mrs. _S――――_, to exalt rich
distinguishing grace! ’Tis that alone hath made the difference. I
believe I need not remind you to pray, dear Mrs. _S――――_, for

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXI.

                  _To Serjeant B――――, at Gibraltar._

             _On board the Mary and Ann, bound from London to Leith,
                                                     July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

I Am glad to hear that you are yet alive, and what is more, I trust
you are alive to GOD. Perhaps I may never see you again on this side
eternity. O that we may approve ourselves good soldiers of JESUS
CHRIST! How bright will our crown be then, at that last great day! I
find there is nothing like being valiant for the truth. JESUS CHRIST
is a glorious captain. He makes me more than conqueror through his
love. I have seen great things, within these few months. I should
have answered you sooner, but could not get time till now: I am
embarked for _Scotland_. I hope you take particular care to beat down
self-righteousness, and exalt the LORD JESUS alone in your hearts. I
find, the only happiness is to lie down as a poor sinner at the feet
of the once crucified, but now exalted Lamb of GOD, who died for our
sins and rose again for our justification. I rejoice to hear, that
some even at _Gibraltar_ still dare to own a too too much neglected
Saviour. Blessed be GOD, the governor is so favourable to you. This
is a great motive to love and thankfulness. The work of GOD still goes
on in _England_, and other parts. O for that glorious period, when
the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the LORD as the
waters cover the seas! That our dear LORD may every day reign as king
in all your souls, is the prayer of, dear Serjeant,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXII.

                           _To Miss R――――._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Miss_,

A Few hours ago I came on board. To shew that you are in my mind, I
employ some of my first leisure time in answering your letter. The
condition you are in now, ought not to make you think that JESUS
CHRIST has cast you off, and that it will be presumption in you to
believe on him. The LORD is now shewing you, that you are poor, and
miserable, and blind, and naked, and such only are the persons that
think they want his almighty aid. I fear you look too much into
yourself, and from thence are discouraged. Whereas you should look
directly to CHRIST, and come to him in all your blood. You will always
fly from him, as long as you count him your enemy. But do not think
so hardly of him; JESUS is the sinner’s friend. O how doth his bowels
yearn towards you! Are you made willing to be made whole? CHRIST
invites and commands you to come to him; venture then upon him. If you
never have believed yet, it is time for you to believe _now_. “LORD,
give me faith!” for faith is the free gift of GOD . What if your heart
be hard, JESUS can soften it. What if you have yet no marks of your
election? surely you dare not say, “You are not elected,” or that
CHRIST hath not died for you, even for you. It is, indeed, a bad
thing to have only notions in the head, and no solid experience in
the heart. But it is a good thing to be convinced of this. Blessed be
GOD, who hath given you to bewail it. Look upon this as a token for
good.――Trust not to means; when they are taken from you, CHRIST can and
will work without them. The LORD may bring you help in a way, and at a
time you know not of. Your extremity shall be GOD’s opportunity. If
the LORD vouchsafes to bless this letter in the least degree to your
comfort, it will much rejoice the heart of, dear Miss,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXIII.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Georgia._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

WITH much pleasure I have again read over your kind letter. GOD is a
GOD hearing prayer. My dear brother _H――――_ is awakened out of sleep.
Help me men, help me angels, to praise GOD in his behalf! My dear
brother, I pray GOD you may never lie down again. CHRIST is now giving
you light; walk and rejoice in that light. Keep close, keep close, my
dear man, and let nothing steal away your poor heart from the blessed
JESUS. Give it all to him, give it to him, hard, earthly, sensual,
devilish, as it is. He will wash it in his precious blood. Do not tie
him down to any degree of conviction. So that he brings you home, let
him do it in that way he shall think best. What a loving Saviour have
you to deal with! You cannot conceive how kind he is, even _to me_
every day. I feel and see his power more and more. He seems to be
beginning his work afresh in _England_, and it gladdens my heart to
hear he is among you at _Bethesda_. O do nothing to grieve the blessed
spirit! Let your conversation be such in all things, as becomes the
gospel of the blessed JESUS. Have the greatest regard for the little
lambs. Do nothing that may prove a stumbling block to their precious
souls. Warm yourself by talking to them. Be not one moment idle.
Redeem your precious time; for you know not when your LORD may come.
My brother, my heart is full of love to thee.――May you be a beloved
physician! Beloved of the LORD, beloved of the LORD’s people, and a
continual comfort to

        Your most unworthy, though truly affectionate brother,
                    and servant in the dear JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXIV.

                         _To Mr. Wm. G――――._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _My dear Brother G――――_,

YOUR kind letter I have just been reading over a second time. It gave
me comfort; but the high stile extorted a smile or two from me. I
believe you have been reading over Mrs. _D――――_’s letters. You wanted
to imitate her way of writing, but fail for want of her experience.
It is a good thing not to go out of our depth. Methinks I see you
look down and blush; but look up again immediately to JESUS CHRIST:
He knows whereof we are made, and remembers we are but dust. Indeed
I write to my dear man out of much love. Blessed be GOD, that all
things are carried on with such decency and order. I pray GOD that you
may so live, that all who come to see you may say, “Surely GOD is in
this place.” Your prayers in my behalf are heard. I am quickened, and
strengthened mightily both in soul and body: controversial points are
ended, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST triumphs gloriously. I find my heart
often drawn towards _Bethesda_. I hope I shall yet meet you again in
the flesh, and embrace you one by one in my unworthy arms. In the mean
time, I commit you to the bosom of JESUS. May you lean upon his breast,
and sit under his shadow with great delight! May you be truly simple,
truly childlike, and every way conformable to our great exemplar the
spotless Lamb. I long for that time, when we shall sit down at his
marriage supper: though I have the lowest place, it will suffice, dear
brother _G――――_,

            Your affectionate brother, friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXV.

                  _To Mr. J―――― S――――, at Georgia._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear John_,

YOUR case puts me in mind of that passage, where we are told that our
LORD looked upon _Peter_. Surely, he has looked upon and prayed for
you, otherwise how would Satan have sifted you? But see what comfort
another passage may afford you, “Go tell my brethren and _Peter_.”
Poor, weeping, penitent _Peter_ must in no wise be forgotten. “Go
tell them that I am risen.” Here are glad tidings of great joy
to a disconsolate soul. May GOD apply it to your’s in particular.
Dear _John_, may you learn from hence to stab your dear Saviour no
more. I wonder not that you are in darkness. GOD will surely visit
your offences with a rod, and your backslidings with some spiritual
scourge. That is enough to keep us from sinning, though we know that
his loving-kindness he will not utterly take from us, nor suffer his
truth to fail. How dearly did _David_ pay for his stolen sweets? What
anguish has your poor soul felt, since I left you. Blessed be GOD,
that he has awakened you out of sleep. O free grace! I rejoice, yea
and I will rejoice. That you may never provoke GOD to leave you to
yourself, is the earnest prayer of, dear _John_,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXVI.

          _To Rebekah B――――, an Orphan at the Orphan-house._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Bekky_,

AND is the LORD still striving with you? O then admire his patience,
and give him your whole heart. I had no other end in bringing you to
_Bethesda_, but that you might be brought to JESUS. I hope you will
yet find it a house of mercy to your soul. Take heed of resting in
conviction. You know by experience how sadly it wears off. You may
well wonder, that GOD has not sent you to hell long ago. I pray GOD,
that his goodness may lead you to repentance, and that you may walk
before the LORD in all well-pleasing, so long as you live. What sweet
opportunities do you enjoy! How freely may you go into the woods,
and pour out your heart before the dear JESUS. How early was _Samuel_
acquainted with the LORD, and why should not you be acquainted with
him? Unless you are, you can never be at peace. Come then, my dear
lamb, and wander no longer; return to the shepherd and bishop of your
soul. Behold, he shed his blood for you, and will carry you to heaven,
rejoicing over you to all eternity. Away to him then in all your blood,
just as you are; and when you are near to GOD, forget not

                      Your affectionate friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXVII.

                   _To Elizabeth G――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Betty_,

I Am glad you begin to feel the hardness of your heart, and your
utter inability to pray. I pray GOD you may in all things see your
helplessness, that you may come as a poor helpless nothing to JESUS
CHRIST, and take him for your all in all. I wonder not that satan
endeavours to terrify your soul. You know how he tore the young child
in the Gospel, whilst he was coming to JESUS CHRIST. Your convictions
at present seem to arise from a fear of hell; but before you receive
this, I hope the LORD JESUS will have sealed your pardon, and have
said, “Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.” O _Betty_, why
has GOD singled you out? Why was you brought to _Bethesda_? Away when
you read this, and bless GOD for it, and devote yourself again and
again to that LORD, who has bought you with his precious blood. Having
much forgiven you, love much. Lie down in the dust, and be continually
looking to the rock from whence you are hewn. To hear that you, and my
dear family, love the LORD JESUS in sincerity, will much rejoice the
heart of

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXVIII.

                     _To Mary A――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Molly_,

UPON reading your letter, I put up this prayer, “LORD lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon her soul.” You once had joy. I found
it puffed you up. I pray GOD to humble you by your present darkness.
You may now see what a poor wretch you are, how proud, how earthly,
how sensual, how devilish; and yet, stupendous love! JESUS CHRIST will
still receive you. Your loving Saviour opens his arms, and invites
you to throw the whole of your load upon him. I am persuaded he will
receive you: go to him then, and confess that you have sinned. He will
receive you; for what says the scripture? “Look unto me, all ye ends
of the earth, and be ye saved.” Surely _Molly A――――_ is included here.
The dear JESUS is all love. He has brought you to a house of mercy.
Out of love, keep his commandments, and love all that are around you.
Be willing to be the servant of all, and from gratitude to GOD study
to be a comfort to

                    Your sincere friend in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXIX.

                _To the Honourable J―――― B――――, Esq._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _Hon. Sir_,

WITH much pleasure I received yours by the hands of your son, who
offered to do me any service that lay in his power. This, as well
as your other past favours, quite surprize, and ought to humble me;
for who am I, that I should be thus highly honoured? O sovereign
grace! O distinguishing love! If I did not stand up in defence of
that, the very stones would cry out against me. Indeed, honoured Sir,
your kindness makes me almost to blush, and the love of JESUS quite
confounds me. I am lost, I want to sink into nothing whenever I think
of CHRIST’s dying for me. I really think, I am the most ungrateful
sinner that ever was, and yet the Redeemer follows me with his mercies
every day. Unspeakable are the trials wherewith I have been visited
since my arrival. But out of all the LORD delivers me. I experience
daily much of his divine presence; a wider door than ever is opened
for preaching the everlasting gospel, and GOD seems to be beginning
his work again in _Old-England_: it adds to my joy, to hear what
the LORD is doing amongst you. Blessed, for ever blessed be GOD, for
causing such a stirring among the dry bones. I pray the glorious
Redeemer, to carry on the good work begun, and to make _New-England_
the joy of the whole earth. I suppose you have heard, honoured Sir,
of the remarkable effusion of the spirit among the children of the
orphan-house. Surely, JESUS CHRIST is about to bring mighty things
to pass. Whilst the kings of the earth are enlarging their dominions,
I trust our LORD will usher in his.――I shall not be surprized, if
after this great commotion in _New-England_, I hear that some outward
troubles befal them. The removal of you, honoured Sir, from being
governor, I take to be no good sign. I hope this has no other effect
upon your own heart, than to make you more and more hunger and thirst
after that righteousness, which neither men nor devils shall ever be
able to take from you. GOD only knows, how often I have prayed, that
this affliction may be sanctified unto you. I think, honoured Sir, I
cannot forget you and your people. Both are dear, very dear to my soul.
I sometimes long to see _Boston_ again, that I may rejoice in what
great things the LORD has done; but various circumstances concur to
detain me on this side the ocean, all the next Winter. I am now in
my passage to _Scotland_. What the LORD is pleased to do there, your
honour may hear in my next. I rejoice, that I am a little retired
from the world, and have the opportunity, honoured Sir, of writing
to you. How sweet is retirement when CHRIST is present in the heart?
Having him, I find I possess all things. Happy they that can wrap
themselves in GOD. May you and yours be thus happy! This will enable
you, honoured Sir, to rejoice in tribulation, and give thanks for
every thing that does befal you. Tho’ the ship is moving, and I am
somewhat sick, I know not how to leave off. Indeed, I love and honour
you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. That you and yours may be rooted and
grounded in his love, and filled with all the fulness of GOD, is the
hearty prayer of, honoured Sir,

           Your most affectionate, obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXX.

               _To the Reverend Dr. C――――, at Boston._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Had the pleasure of yours, and have taken the freedom to publish
part of it, because I thought our LORD’s cause might be promoted
thereby. Glory be to the ever blessed JESUS, for the great work
begun in your province. Glory be to his great name, for raising up
instruments to carry it on; especially for working so powerfully
among the sons of the prophets. A most promising omen this for dear
_New-England_. Reverend Sir, the searcher of hearts only knows,
how deeply the welfare of your people is impressed upon my soul.
I continually make mention of them in my poor prayers, both public
and private, and have not failed to give thanks in their behalf. You
seem a little offended, that I did not mention old Mr. _W――――s_. It
was, because by his conversation I could not find he came up to that
character which you gave him. Mr. _S――――_ I truly value, and lately
have had reason to think much better of him than formerly, when his
experiences to me seemed too superficial; but I am a poor, weak,
fallible worm, and therefore my judgment is of little worth. I rejoice
to hear that the ministers with you help forward the work of GOD. I
find no such enemies to the cross of CHRIST, as those who keep up the
form of religion, and are orthodox in their notions, but are ignorant
of an experimental acquaintance with JESUS. However, the work of GOD
is beginning afresh. I have free access every where, and have been
upon the full stretch preaching to large auditories twice a day, for
some time past. The LORD is pleased to strengthen me both in body and
soul. His presence fills the assemblies, and, I verily believe, we
shall yet see glorious days. I have sweet accounts from the Orphans.
I thank you, dear Sir, for your care concerning them. I have been in
great straits; but the dear JESUS helps me through them all. Help me,
dear Sir, help me to praise him. My tender love awaits both you and
your people. I am glad to hear, that my kind hostess is recovered.
May the LORD strengthen her mightily, and cause her to go down to
the grave in peace! I earnestly desire a continuance of your own and
people’s prayers in behalf of, reverend Sir,

                 Your affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXXI.

                     _To John D――――, at Boston._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _My dear child_,

I Thank you for your letter: I neither forgot you nor my promise. O
that GOD may effectually work upon your heart betimes, for you cannot
be good too soon, or too good. The little orphans at _Georgia_ are
crying out, “What shall we do to be saved?” And I am glad to hear,
that this is the language of some little ones in _New-England_. If
you know any of them, pray give my love to them, and tell them, I pray
that JESUS CHRIST may be revealed in their dear hearts. How early was
JESUS CHRIST in the Temple, first hearing, and then asking questions?
How did he love the little children, how did he take them up in his
sacred arms and bless them; and when he was just ascending to the
highest heaven, how tenderly did he speak to _Peter_, and bid him
“feed his lambs.” Let all this encourage you to come unto him. He
will certainly receive you, tho’ you have been wicked; nay, he will
abundantly pardon you. And what comfort will you enjoy, when you know
your sins are forgiven you? You will then have a heaven upon earth.
In expectation of seeing you a christian indeed, and grown in grace,
I subscribe myself

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXII.

             _To the Honourable J―――― W――――, at Boston._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _Honoured Sir_,

PRESUMING it would not be disagreeable to you, I have taken the
liberty to print part of the letter you was so kind as to send me.
Surely it will rejoice the hearts of thousands, to hear what good
things the LORD is doing in these parts. It has put much gladness
into my heart, and caused me to give many thanks in behalf of the
people of _New-England_. How good is our GOD! When things are a little
troublesome without, he sends his gospel to comfort his children
within. Surely JESUS CHRIST is about to set the world in a flame.
He is working powerfully at home; he is working powerfully abroad.
I trust he will continue working, ’till the earth be filled with
the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. I hope you
will yet feel more of this light and life in your own heart, before
you go hence, and be comforted with the comforts wherewith I am daily
comforted of GOD. Dear Sir, JESUS is a precious Master. He, as it were,
dandles me upon his knees. He carries me in his arms, he fights all
my battles, and makes me more than conqueror thro’ his love. My work
is great, but my supports are greater. He assures me from day to day,
that he will never leave me nor forsake me. My infirmities often make
me blush, and yet JESUS passes them all by. Dear Sir, think often
on the love of CHRIST: think of his dying love; that must give you
comfort. I rejoice at this opportunity of writing to you. I thank you
for your kind caution. I pray GOD to teach me how to improve it. Help
me, dear Sir, with your prayers; and accept of these few lines from,
honoured Sir,

        Your most affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXIII.

                   _To Mr. E―――― D――――, at Boston._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. D――――_,

I Am to be blamed for not sending you a line. I am an ungrateful
creature; ungrateful to my earthly friends, unspeakably more so to
the friend of all. Pardon me this once. GOD willing, you shall have no
reason to complain of me any more. If you remember, once in my sermon
I said, “O that _New-England_ was full of new creatures!” I hope the
LORD in some measure is going to answer that prayer.――It rejoices my
heart, to hear that the gospel runs so swiftly, and is so remarkably
glorified amongst you. This is the LORD’s doings, and it ought to be
marvellous in our eyes. Blessed are the eyes that see the things which
we see; blessed are the ears that hear the things which we hear, for
many righteous men have desired to see and hear them, and have not. I
rejoice also to hear, that there is like to be a church in your house.
O, dear Sir, take care that none of you rest, till you have got fast
hold of the blessed JESUS. My kind love to dear Mrs. _D――――_. May
CHRIST’s justifying blood be upon you and your children. I return
my love to all that are so kind as to remember me. I believe I shall
not see you this Winter. The work is very great, and goes on very
prosperous in _England_. However, you are all upon my heart, and the
more heartily you pray for me, the sooner shall I be restored unto
you. I hope I feel the benefit of your dear people’s prayers; for GOD
comforts and strengthens me daily, and carries me on from conquering
to conquer. On shore, I have scarce time to write a line; being now on
board, I take this opportunity of returning you my hearty thanks for
your kind letter, and of assuring you that I am, dear Mr. _D――――_,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXIV.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. R――――, at Boston_.

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 26, 1741._
  _My dear Brother R――――_,

HOW glad was I to receive a letter from your hands, having heard
nothing of, or from you particularly, since we parted. What great
things has the LORD shewn us since that time. Methinks I hear you
say, “and yet I can tell of greater things.” I believe we shall see
far greater yet before we die. The work is beginning afresh here. I
sometimes think _B―――― G――――_ must take a voyage over to _Old-England_.
Most of our _London_ ministers too much shun the cross, and do not
appear boldly for GOD.――Now the LORD hath worked so powerfully in your
college, I have less to say against your joining with Mr. _W――――_. I
am glad to hear you speak plainly and closely. What comfort will this
afford you in a dying hour? Go on, my dear brother, go on; venture
daily upon CHRIST, go out in his strength, and he will enable you to
do wonders. He is with me more and more. I have been sweetly carried
thro’ the heat and burden of every day’s labour. JESUS bears all my
burdens. JESUS enables me to cast all my cares upon him. O then let us
magnify his name together! I am now going to _Scotland_, knowing not
what will befal me. What GOD does, you may expect to hear shortly.
In the mean while, let us pray for and write to each other. As iron
sharpeneth iron, so doth the letters of a man his friend. Your last
I have printed: GOD’s glory called me to it. My dear brother, adieu!
Dear Brother _S――――_ sits by and salutes you. My kind love awaits
Mr. _W――――_, and all that love the LORD JESUS in sincerity. In hopes
of receiving another letter from you shortly, I subscribe myself, dear
Mr. _R._

          Your very affectionate, tho’ very unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXXV.

       _To the Students, &c. under convictions at the colleges
    of Cambridge and New-haven,――in New-England and Connecticut._

  _Dear Gentlemen_,

WITH unspeakable pleasure have I heard, that there seems to be a
general concern among you about the things of GOD. It was no small
grief to me, that I was obliged to say of your college, that “your
light was become darkness;” yet are ye now become light in the LORD.
I heartily thank GOD, even the Father of our glorious Redeemer, for
sending dear Mr. _T――――_ among you. What great things may we not
now expect to see in _New-England_, since it has pleased GOD to work
so remarkably among the sons of the prophets? Now we may expect a
reformation indeed, since it is beginning at the house of GOD. A
dead ministry will always make a dead people. Whereas, if ministers
are warmed with the love of GOD themselves, they cannot but be
instruments of diffusing that love among others. This, this is the
best preparation for the work whereunto you are to be called. Learning
without piety, will only make you more capable of promoting the
kingdom of satan. Henceforward, therefore, I hope you will enter into
your studies not to get a parish, nor to be polite preachers, but to
be great saints. This, indeed, is the most compendious way to true
learning: for an understanding enlightened by the spirit of GOD, is
more susceptible of divine truths, and I am certain will prove most
useful to mankind. The more holy you are, the more will GOD delight
to honour you. He loves to make use of instruments, which are like
himself. I hope the _good old divinity_ will now be precious to your
souls, and you will think it an honour to tread in the steps of your
pious forefathers. They were acquainted with their own hearts.――They
knew what it was to be tempted themselves, and therefore from their
own experience knew how to succour others. O may you follow them,
as they followed CHRIST. Then great, very great will be your reward
in heaven. I am sure you can never serve a better Master than JESUS
CHRIST, or be engaged in a higher employ than in calling home souls
to him. I trust, dear gentlemen, you will not be offended at me for
sending you these few lines. I write out of the fulness of my heart.
I make mention of you always in my prayers. Forget me not in yours. I
am a poor weak worm. I am the chief of sinners, and yet, O stupendous
love! the LORD’s work still prospers in my unworthy hands.――Fail not
to give thanks, as well as to pray for

      Your affectionate brother and servant, in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXVI.

                      _To Mr. D――――, at Boston._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 25, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

YOUR’s as well as other letters, which I received from _Boston_,
gave me no small satisfaction. Now, now I live, if poor sinners
are flocking for life to the dear LORD JESUS. How may we suppose
the angels to be rejoicing over _Boston_, and other places in
_New-England_! How glad are they to see the lectures frequented as in
times of old, and the spirit of your good forefathers reviving among
you! Sure it must be delightful to see black and white, young men and
maidens, old men and children, praising the name of the LORD. Blessed
be GOD, who in this great awakening hath not passed by your house.
Fear not, dear Sir: Who knows but the blessed JESUS may yet visit you
with the light of his blessed countenance? I rejoice to hear he has
been gracious to your wife and daughter. I pray GOD, you may be all
built up in our most holy faith, and go on from strength to strength,
till you come to appear before the LORD CHRIST in glory. I thank
GOD, who hath heard prayer on my behalf. I am strengthened daily both
in body and soul, and have reason to think my ministry is blessed
more and more. Let GOD’s goodness to me, encourage you to expect
great things from our LORD. He is able and willing to do for us more
abundantly than we can ask or think. That you and your dear family may
daily drink of his divine pleasures, as out of a river, is the earnest
prayer of, dear Sir,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXVII.

           _To John R――――, an Orphan, at the Orphan-house._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear John_,

I Remember you once wanted to go away from _Bethesda_. Adore the free
grace and mercy of that GOD, who has kept you there. I trust, it will
prove the saving of your precious and immortal soul. To see oneself
lost and condemned by nature, is the first step to conversion. I hope
before this time you have found yourself saved by grace: for “by grace
alone you are to be saved, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift
of GOD.” The LORD JESUS hath indeed been knocking at the door of your
heart. I trust, now he will break the door open, and give himself
admission. Dear _John_, you may well wonder, that the LORD hath not
sent you to hell. I trust, that you feel you deserve it. O that GOD
may pluck you as a brand out of the burning. This was my only view
in bringing you to _Bethesda_. This is the only desire of the dear
friends who have the rule over you; they watch for your soul, &c. The
devil (as you observe) watches to destroy it: and, therefore, my dear
boy, away to JESUS CHRIST. He can take away the heart of stone: he can
give you an heart of flesh. All things are possible with Him. That GOD
may give you grace to take the kingdom of heaven with a holy violence,
is the hearty prayer of, dear _John_,

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCXXVIII.

                     _To James M――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear James_,

I Am glad to hear by dear brother _B――――_’s letters, that your soul
has received comfort. I am comforted at the news. May GOD increase it
daily, ’till your joy be full. I must think GOD loves you, and that he
has begun a good work in your soul. I hope to find at my return that
it is carried on, and that you have been pressing forward towards the
mark for the prize of your high calling in CHRIST JESUS your saviour.
Dear _James_, I do not forget you. I hope you never will forget the
love of CHRIST, who died and hath given himself for you. Does not
the very thought of this make you even to weep? Do you not want some
private place where to vent your heart? Away then, I will detain
you no longer. Retire into the woods. Go look to him whom you have
pierced, and with a godly sorrow mourn for your sins, as a woman for
her first-born. At the same time, forget not to sigh out a prayer in
behalf of, dear _James_,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXIX.

                     _To Thomas Webb, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear Thomas_,

HOW inconsistent is the devil! How artfully does he strive to keep
poor souls from CHRIST! Sometimes he labours to drive poor souls
into despair; sometimes to presumption. These are the two rocks,
against which he would fain have poor souls to make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience. I pray GOD to enable you to steer a middle
course.――May you see your misery, and at the same time see your remedy
in the cross and wounds of JESUS CHRIST. He calls to all weary heavy
laden souls; consequently he calls you. Your coming to him, will be
a proof of your election. The devils know nothing of GOD’s decrees.
If ever he should tempt you so again, say, “If I do perish, I will
perish at the feet of CHRIST.” He is willing to save, to save to
the uttermost. He sees, he feels your anguish. He longs to rejoice
over you. Venture therefore upon him. _Thomas_, be not faithless, but
believing. CHRIST shall yet shew you his hands and his feet. He is
the same now, as he was yesterday, full of love and condescension to
self-condemned sinners. That you may experience the full power and
efficacy of the Redeemer’s blood, is the ardent prayer of, dear
_Thomas_,

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXXX.

                         _To William B――――._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._

I Thought your father had sent for you from _Bethesda_; but I hope
your heavenly Father has kept you there to bring you home to himself.
Your deadness has often grieved me. O that I may have reason to sing,
at my return, “_Billy B――――_ was dead, but is alive again; he was lost,
but is found.” You do well to pray to GOD, to search your heart, and
to try your reins; for otherwise your treacherous heart will deceive
you. I would not have you forget what the LORD is doing for you, for
ten thousand worlds. O defer not repentance to a death-bed. It will
be hard to strive with principalities and powers, when you can scarce
turn in your bed. A man, at that time, can hardly bear up under
his bodily infirmities; but a wounded spirit who can bear? Reject,
therefore, such a horrid temptation, with the utmost abhorrence. Be a
worker together with GOD; and now GOD is working in you to will and to
do, see that you work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
Do not stab your Saviour any more. Dear _Billy_, think on his bitter
agony and bloody sweat, and fly to him, as a Redeemer ready and
willing to receive you. That you may be happy in him here, and with
him hereafter, is the hearty prayer of

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXI.

                     _To R―――― W――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear Richard_,

THE contents of your letter pleased me. I have sometimes thought,
if GOD did not convert _Richard W――――_, he would be one of the most
unhappy boys in the world. You have _head-knowledge_; and unless you
are made to see the sinfulness of your heart, it will much increase
your condemnation. Blessed be GOD, who yet hath patience with you, and
seems to be striving with your soul. I do not wonder that the devil
tells you, “it is time to repent when you are a man.” You may well say,
it is the devil that tells you so: Such a suggestion cannot come from
GOD. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation!
JESUS will even now accept you, vile as you are, and ungrateful as
you have been: if you feel your misery, and fly to him for succour, he
will accept you. Every conviction cries, “Come, _Richard_, come to me,
that thou mayest have rest.” Let me advise you, as old _Eli_ advised
young _Samuel_: say, “Speak, LORD, for thy servant heareth.”

                      I am your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXII.

                     _To John F――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear John_,

I Willingly fulfil your request, and sit down to write you a line or
two. I am glad you begin to see the wickedness of your own heart. You
cannot conceive what a mystery of iniquity is hid therein. The more
you see it, the more you will find the want of a saviour, and adore
GOD for giving his dear Son to die for sinners. There was once a young
man, named _John_, who leaned on the Saviour’s bosom, and was his
particular favourite. What if you should be thus highly honoured.
Would it not be an amazing instance of love and condescension? And
what doth the Saviour do less, for all that feel themselves poor, lost,
undone sinners? Nay, does he not do for them infinitely more? Yes, he
does. Come to him, therefore, by faith, and he shall embrace you in
the arms of his mercy, clothe you with his righteousness, sanctify
you by his spirit, guide you by his counsel, and after death receive
you up into glory. Look up, then, and never rest till you have it.
Conviction is not conversion. But you know who has promised not to
quench the smoaking flax, or break the bruised reed. That this promise
may be fulfilled in your soul, is the hearty prayer of

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCXXXIII.

                     _To L―――― M――――, an Orphan._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 27, 1741._
  _Dear L―――― M――――_,

AND are little boys and girls, at this and that corner of the wood,
crying unto the LORD? I hope you, dear _L――――_, are always among them;
and may the LORD hear your prayers, when you cry unto him! Surely
he will, if you feel yourselves poor sinners. Never did JESUS reject
an humble suppliant. “Suffer (says he) little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” Dear
_L――――_, take all possible care to cherish your convictions. GOD has
spoken once, yea twice to you, in an extraordinary manner. You are
one of the oldest; you ought to go before the rest, and to encourage
them to follow the ever-blessed JESUS. Satan will, no doubt, be very
busy; and therefore you ought to be busy also. You fight under a good
captain, even JESUS CHRIST, who will tread all enemies under your
feet. My dear child, redeem your precious time. Fight the good fight
of faith; and when you are wrestling with GOD, fail not to pray for

                         Your sincere friend,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXIV.

                 _To Mr. Thomas J――――, at Savannah._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 29, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Thank you for your continued kindness to my dear family. The GOD
whom I serve, will richly reward you. I am more and more convinced,
that the Orphan-house is of GOD. He will uphold it with his mighty
arm. Dear Sir, there is nothing like a life of faith. It is more and
more pleasant to me every day. I pray GOD, you may experience it every
moment, and be enabled entirely to overcome the world. My letters,
to my dear family, will inform you, how the LORD hath been pleased to
deal with me. Blessed be his name, he hath delivered, he does, he will
yet deliver. My soul has been among lions. JESUS hath been my helper.
I am very comfortable within, and experience more of the divine
presence in preaching, I think, than ever I did before in _England_.
I suppose I shall not embark for _America_ till Spring. Whatever good
offices you are pleased to do for my family, shall be then fully
acknowledged by, dear Sir,

              Your obliged friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXV.

                     _To Mr. L――――, at Bristol._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 29, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. L――――_,

WE are now within thirty miles of our desired haven. We have had
a pleasant passage. Before I go ashore, I would fain answer your
kind letter. Fear not for _Bristol_. No weapon formed against _Zion_
shall prosper. Let us wait patiently, and we shall certainly see the
salvation of GOD. The LORD is beginning his work afresh. I suppose
brother _C――――_ has told you something of it. I never felt greater
power in _England_. I have had GOD’s continued presence during the
passage. GOD has given me sweet sleep at night, and a good appetite
to my food by day. Faithful is he who hath promised, that those who
wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength. I speak thus freely
to you, because I know you will be thankful on my behalf. I hope both
you and your dear wife, are making daily advances in the divine life.
Whilst others are disputing, let us be growing. This will be the best
way to convince those, who you find will not be convinced any other
way. Adieu! The LORD be with you. May your soul breathe nothing but
gentleness and love!

   I am, dear Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXVI.

                 _To Mr. H――――, at the Orphan-house._

                         _On board the Mary and Ann, July 30, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

I Have been five days on board, and am now just at our desired haven.
GOD’s presence has sweetened the passage, and I have had freedom to
write many letters besides those sent to _Bethesda_. If you, and dear
brother _B――――_, think proper, the little ones may be called, and the
letters read before you. A word of exhortation, and a short prayer,
may not be unseasonable. I thank you all for the tender care you take
of the dear lambs. You serve a master, who will richly reward all
your pains. I hope there will come a time, when I shall embrace and
weep over you all with tears of love! At present, I feel myself a
poor sinner, and stand amazed at GOD’s goodness and patience extended
towards me. I am less than the least of his mercies. You may expect
to hear from me again shortly. O do not forget to pray for me. My dear
friends, for the present, adieu! The LORD be with your spirit.

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCXXXVII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― C――――._

                                          _Edinburgh, Aug. 1, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

THE LORD was very gracious to me on board. He gave us a pleasant
passage. As you know that the Messrs. _Erskines_ gave me the first
invitation to _Scotland_, and hath been praying for me in the most
public, explicit, I could almost say extravagant manner, for near two
years last past, I was determined to give them the first offer of my
poor ministrations. Accordingly, I went yesterday to _Dumfermling_,
where dear Mr. _R―――― E――――_ hath got a large and separate, or, as
it is commonly termed, seceding meeting-house. He received me very
lovingly. I preached to his and the town’s people.――A very thronged
assembly――After I had done prayer, and named my text, the rustling
made by opening the bibles all at once, quite surprized me: a scene,
I never was witness to before. Our conversation after sermon, in the
house, was such as became the gospel of CHRIST. They entertained me
with various accounts of the success of the _Seceders_ labours; and,
as a proof of GOD’s being with them, Mr. _R――――_’s son-in-law told
me, that, at one of their late occasions, a woman was so deeply
affected, that she was obliged to stop her mouth with an handkerchief
to keep herself from crying out. They urged a longer stay, in order
to converse more closely, and to set me right about church government,
and the solemn league and covenant. I informed them, that I had given
notice of preaching at _Edinburgh_ this evening; but, as they desired
it, I would in a few days return, and meet the associate presbytery in
Mr. _R――――_’s house. This was agreed on. Dear Mr. _E――――_ accompanied
me, and this evening I preached to many thousands, in a place called
_The Orphan-house Park_. The LORD was there. Immediately after sermon,
a large company, among whom were some of the nobility, came to salute
me. Amidst our conversation, came in a portly, well-looking Quaker,
nephew to Messrs. _E――――_, formerly a Baptist minister in the north
of _England_, who, taking me by the hand, said, “Friend _George_, I
am as thou art; I am for bringing all to the life and power of the
everliving GOD: and, therefore, if thou wilt not quarrel with me about
my hat, I will not quarrel with thee about thy gown.” In this respect,
I wish all, of every denomination, were thus minded. I find GOD has
blessed my works in these parts. I am most cordially received by many
that love the LORD JESUS. I have just been in company with a nobleman,
who, I believe, truly fears GOD; and also with a lady of fashion, that
discovers a christian spirit indeed. I already hear of great divisions.
But JESUS knows how to bring order out of confusion. I hope the LORD
is much with you, my dear brother. O may you be anointed more and more,
till you are filled with all the fulness of GOD. Be pleased to read
this to all in _Wine-street_; and remember me kindly to all that love
the glorious Redeemer. He is a dear, dear JESUS. Tho’ we die for, yet
let us not deny him in any wise. Pray that such a mind may be always
given to

        Your weak and unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCXXXVIII.

                _To the Rev. Mr. G. W――――, at Maxton._

                                          _Edinburgh, Aug. 1, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

YOUR kind letter, like all other tokens of my precious Master’s love,
quite amazes me. I hear you are a good old soldier of JESUS CHRIST. O
that you had wrote to me sooner! I want the advice and exhortation of
those who have been in CHRIST before me. The LORD is pleased greatly
to bless me. His work seems to be beginning afresh in _England_. How
it goes on abroad, the papers sent with this will inform you. Help me,
dear Sir, help me with your prayers, that the LORD may bless my coming
here. I hope some have felt the divine presence in this evening’s
exercise. Thro’ grace I can say, I did, and do now. O that I could
be humble and thankful! O that my heart glowed with the love of GOD
and men! I would breathe nothing but love. I would love all that love
the LORD JESUS, of whatsoever denomination. May the LORD heal our
divisions, and grant that we may not thereby provoke him to send us
a common persecution to drive us together! O that we may stand in
a trying hour. Dear Sir, I shall be glad to see you at _Edinburgh_
any day after _Wednesday_ next, and then we can settle when to come
into your parts. I am willing to preach the gospel to all. It is now
late, but I was willing to write, lest something should hinder me on
_Monday_. Dear Sir, good night. I commend you to GOD, thank you for
your prayers, and desire a continuance of them in behalf of

        Your affectionate younger brother, and fellow-labourer
                     in the Redeemer’s vineyard,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXXXIX.

                 _To Mr. Thomas N――――, at New-York._

                                          _Edinburgh, Aug. 8, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Have written you several letters; and I rejoice to hear that the
work of the LORD prospers in the hands of Messrs. _T――――s_, &c. am
glad they intend to meet in a synod by themselves. Their catholic
spirit will do good. The _associate presbytery_ here, are so confined,
that they will not so much as hear me preach, unless I only will join
with them. Mr. _Ralph E――――_, indeed, did hear me, and went up with
me into the pulpit of the _Cannon-gate_ church.――The people were ready
to shout for joy; but, I believe, it gave offence to his associates.
I met most of them, according to appointment, on _Wednesday_ last.――A
set of grave venerable men! They soon proposed to form themselves into
a presbytery, and were proceeding to chuse a moderator――I asked them
for what purpose? They answered, to discourse, and set me right, about
the matter of church-government, and the solemn league and covenant.
I replied, they might save themselves that trouble, for I had no
scruples about it; and that settling church-government, and preaching
about the solemn league and covenant, was not my plan; I then told
them something of my experience, and how I was led out into my present
way of acting. One in particular said, he was deeply affected; and the
dear Mr. _E――――_ desired they would have patience with me, for that
having been born and bred in _England_, and never studied the point, I
could not be supposed to be so perfectly acquainted with the nature of
their covenants. One, much warmer than the rest, immediately replied,
“that no indulgence was to be shown me; that _England_ had revolted
most with respect to church government; and that I, born and educated
there, could not but be acquainted with the matter now in debate.”
I told him, I had never yet made the solemn league and covenant the
object of my study, being too busy about matters, as I judged, of
greater importance. Several replied, that every pin of the tabernacle
was precious.――I said, that in every building there were outside and
inside workmen; that the latter, at present, was my province; that
if they thought themselves called to the former, they might proceed
in their own way, and I should proceed in mine. I then asked them
seriously, what they would have me to do; the answer was that I was
not desired to subscribe immediately to the solemn league and covenant;
but to preach only for them till I had further light. I asked, why
only for them? Mr. _Ralph E――――_ said, “they were the LORD’s people.”
I then asked, whether there were no other LORD’s people but themselves;
and supposing all others were the devil’s people, they certainly
had more need to be preached to, and therefore I was more and more
determined to go out into the highways and hedges; and that if the
Pope himself would lend me his pulpit, I would gladly proclaim the
righteousness of JESUS CHRIST therein. Soon after this, the company
broke up; and one of these, otherwise venerable men, immediately went
into the meeting-house, and preached upon these words, “Watchman,
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? The watchman said,
The morning cometh, and also the night, if ye will enquire, enquire
ye; return, come.” I attended; but the good man so spent himself
in the former part of his sermon, in talking against prelacy, the
common-prayer book, the surplice, the rose in the hat, and such like
externals, that when he came to the latter part of his text, to invite
poor sinners to JESUS CHRIST, his breath was so gone, that he could
scarce be heard. What a pity that the last was not first, and the
first last! The consequence of all this was, an open breach. I retired,
I wept, I prayed, and after preaching in the fields, sat down and
dined with them, and then took a final leave. At table a gentlewoman
said, she had heard that I had told some people, that the associate
presbytery were building a _Babel_. I said, “Madam, it is quite true;
and I believe the _Babel_ will soon fall down about their ears:”
but enough of this. LORD, what is man, what the best of men? but men
at the best! I think I have now seen an end of all perfection. Our
brethren in _America_, blessed be GOD, have not so learned CHRIST. Be
pleased to inform them of this letter. I have not time to write now.
The LORD blesses my preaching here, and the work, I think, is begun
afresh in _London_. I preach to many thousands daily, and several have
applied to me already under convictions. I have been here about eight
days. You may expect to hear from me shortly again. The LORD be with
you. I love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST: He will bless you for
what you have done for the poor orphans. He comforts me on every side.
O free grace! Dear brother _S――――_ salutes you all.

                    Ever yours in our common LORD,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXL.

                   _To Mr. T―――― G――――, at London._

                                          _Edinburgh, Aug. 8, 1741._

YOU will see, my dear brother, by the following, what GOD is still
doing for me. On _Sunday_ evening, I preached in a field near the
Orphan-house, to upwards of fifteen thousand people; and on _Monday_,
_Friday_, and _Saturday_ evening, to near as many. On _Tuesday_ I
preached in the _Cannongate_ church; on _Wednesday_ and _Thursday_ at
_Dumfermling_; and at my return on _Friday_ morning, at about eight
o’clock, I preached at a town called _Queens-Ferry_, seven miles
from _Edinburgh_. Every where the auditories were large, and very
attentive. Great power accompanied the word. Many have been brought
under convictions; and I have already received several invitations
to different places, which, GOD willing, I intend to comply with. At
present I can say no more, but desire you to pray for, and expect soon
to hear further from,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXLI.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. W――――, at Dundee._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 10, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Just now had the pleasure of your letter; for which be pleased
to accept my hearty thanks. I trust your prayers will be heard
in my behalf. Glory be to free grace! many are here brought under
convictions. Unworthy as I am, the glorious _Emmanuel_ is pleased to
clothe his word with power. I am amazed at his loving-kindness, and
want heaven and earth to join with me in praising his holy Name. By
your son I have sent some papers, and shall gladly receive any from
you. I wish you would not trouble yourself or me in writing about the
corruptions of the Church of _England_. I believe there is no church
perfect under heaven; but, as GOD, by his providence, is pleased to
send me forth simply to preach the gospel to all, I think there is no
need of casting myself out. The divisions in _Scotland_ are affecting,
and undoubtedly they will occasion great searchings of heart. I pray
GOD to support us in a trying hour. I am not yet determined, when
I shall come your way. I can only promise, it shall be the first
opportunity, and that you shall be apprized of it some time before.
In the mean time, be pleased to bear me upon your heart. I am a weak
helpless worm. Your correspondence will always be agreeable to me.
That you may daily receive fresh anointings from above, is the hearty
prayer of, reverend and dear Sir,

               Your affectionate, tho’ younger brother
                      and servant in the Gospel,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. O――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 10, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Thank you for your kind and obliging letter.――I had not time to
answer it before. GOD willing, I hope to come into the northern parts.
The precise time I cannot yet tell. For ever adored be the LORD for
his free grace! the word is accompanied with great power. Several
apply to me daily under convictions. I find it best simply to preach
the pure gospel, and not to meddle at all with controversy. The
present divisions are a sore judgment to _Scotland_. This is my
comfort, JESUS is king. He will either heal, or bring good out of
them. I have been with several of the associate presbytery; but I see
no hopes of accommodation. O that the power of religion may revive!
Nothing but that can break down the partition wall of bigotry. Dear
Sir, forget not to pray for me. I see more and more that I am nothing,
and that JESUS is all in all. Did I know how, I would send you some
papers; but I hope ere long to have a personal interview; and in the
mean while, I beg leave to subscribe myself, reverend and dear Sir,

                Your affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLIII.

              _To the Right Honourable the Lord R――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 11, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

THOUGH I am just going out, yet I cannot satisfy myself without
snatching a few moments to write to you. I hope this will find your
Lordship safe at your journey’s end, rejoicing in GOD for giving his
angels charge concerning you in the way. It will please your Lordship,
to inform you that the LORD of all Lords hath dealt most lovingly with
me, since your departure hence. His power hath been frequently made
known in the great congregation, and many come to me daily, crying
out, “What shall I do to be saved?” The work of the LORD also goes
on in _America_, and in _England_, so that I hope we shall see the
kingdom of GOD come with power. This is the full desire of my soul.
I am determined to seek after and know nothing else. For besides this,
all other things are but dung and dross. O my Lord, why should we that
are pilgrims, mind earthly things? Why should we that are soldiers,
entangle ourselves with the things of this life? Heavenly-mindedness
is the very life of a christian. It is all in all.――I pray the LORD
that your heart may be drawn more and more towards him, and be fill’d
with all his fulness. I could say more, but Mr. _G―――― W――――_ waits for
me. I am, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLIV.

                   _To Mr. H―――― H――――, in London._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 11, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother H――――_,

THOUGH my eyes are dim, and my body calls for rest, yet I would fain
send you a line before I go. The LORD JESUS is getting himself into
many hearts. I scarce feel any restraint in preaching. Both in public
and private, the LORD clothes his word with power. Poor souls come to
me under deep convictions. Sweet letters are sent to me of the success
of my writings and sermons; and several pressing invitations to many
places. I hope GOD is beginning such a work here, as he begun, and is
now carrying on in _New-England_. Night and day JESUS fills me with
his love. My bodily strength is daily renewed. The LORD is pleased
to open my mouth wide; praise him for it. I have preached twice, and
talked, and walked much to day. My dear man, good-night. The LORD be
with you!

            Ever, ever yours, in the most adorable JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXLV.

           _To the Most Honourable the M――――ss of L――――n._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 12, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

I Am surprized to find your Lordship so condescending as to write to
me. How bright does humility shine in great personages? It is this
renders GOD so amiable to his creatures. He is infinitely good, and
withal infinitely condescending. What an unparalleled instance was
that of his loving kindness, his giving his only begotten Son to die
for sinful man. How low did JESUS stoop when he lay in a manger, much
more when he hung upon the accursed tree. When I think of this mystery
of godliness, I am lost in thought. This makes me to despise all human
happiness, and sets my soul a longing for a full fruition of my JESUS.
I pray GOD to give your Lordship grace to determine to know nothing
but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. He is the only center of true
happiness. In him alone, solid, lasting joys are to be found. Having
JESUS, I find in him I possess all things. But whither am I going?
Your Lordship will excuse me. My heart at present is enlarged. I pray
GOD to visit your Lordship with his great salvation. I thank your
Lordship for your intended benefaction to the poor _Georgia_ orphans.
I hope the glorious Emmanuel will accept it at your hands. I have
sent your Lordship another parcel, seeing the first hath miscarried.
I shall follow it with my poor prayers, being, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLVI.

                        _To Mr. H―――― H――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 13, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

I Longed to receive a letter from you. Blessed be GOD, my longing was
satisfied this day. My heart is much united to you, and carried out
for you. I utterly disapprove of some persons separating principles.
I find, Satan now turns himself into an angel of light, and stirs up
GOD’s children to tempt me to come over to some particular party. The
associate Presbytery have been hard upon me; but I find no freedom,
any longer than I continue just as I am, and evangelize to all. I know
not that I differ from you in one thing. Glory be to GOD for what he
has done at _London_! He is doing great things here. I walk in the
continual sunshine of his countenance. Every day, fresh seals are
given of my ministry. This morning GOD opened my voice to speak to
preachers of the gospel. Be pleased to accept of this summary account
of my proceedings. On _Sunday_ morning, I visited and preached to the
orphans here, and in the evening to as many people as the _Sunday_
before. Every day since, excepting _Monday_, I have preached either in
the churches or field twice a day, and yesterday I collected upwards
of ninety-three pounds for the _Georgia_ orphans. People are daily
coming under deep convictions, and fresh invitations are sent me to
preach at divers places round about. On _Sunday_, I purpose to preach
in the country, and also the greatest part of the following week, and
shall return again, GOD willing, about _Friday_ to this city. O my
brother, exhort all to praise the LORD. I have most sweet letters from
many awakened ones. GOD, I believe, will work in the ministers and
young students hearts. Even so LORD JESUS. Amen. Pray fail not writing
to

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLVII.

                  _To Mr. D―――― E――――, at Sterling._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 13, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Received your kind letter, and heartily bless GOD, if any thing
dropping from my unworthy lips was made of service to your soul. I
believe, GOD inclined me to speak to you. The sons of the prophets are
much upon my heart. I pray GOD that you may be polished shafts, and
noble instruments in his hands, of building up living temples for the
Holy Ghost. The treatment I met with from the associate presbytery,
was not altogether such as I expected. It grieved me, as much as it
did you. I could scarce refrain from bursting into a flood of tears. I
wish all were like-minded with your honoured father and uncle: matters
then would not be carried on with so high an hand. I fear they are led
too much. Such violent methods, such a narrow way of acting, can never
be the way to promote and enlarge the kingdom of the blessed JESUS.
It surely must be wrong to fix such bounds to ourselves, as forbid
even our hearing those who love the LORD JESUS in sincerity, and have
also been owned of him. CHRIST would not have done so.――Supposing the
scheme of government which the associate presbytery contend for to
be scriptural, yet forbearance and long-suffering is to be exercised
towards such as may differ from them; and I am verily persuaded,
there is no such form of government prescribed in the book of GOD,
as excludes a toleration of all other forms whatsoever. Was the New
Testament outward tabernacle to be built as punctual as the old,
as punctual directions would have been given about the building it;
whereas, it is only deduced by inference, and thus we see Independents,
Presbyterians, and Episcopalians bring the same text to support their
particular scheme, and I believe JESUS CHRIST thereby would teach
us to exercise forbearance and long-suffering to each other. Was
the associate presbytery scheme to take effect, out of conscience,
if they acted consistently, they must restrain, and grieve, if not
persecute many of GOD’s children who could not possibly come into
their measures; and I doubt not but their present violent methods,
together with the corruptions of that assembly, will cause many to
turn Independents, and set up particular churches of their own. This
was the effect of archbishop _Laud_’s acting with so high an hand; and
whether it be presbytery or episcopacy, if managed in the same manner,
it will be productive of the same effects. Blessed be GOD, I have
not so learned CHRIST. I preach the simple gospel, and our glorious
JESUS is pleased to attend it with his power. Every day I feel more
and more of the divine presence, and people are coming to me crying,
“What shall we do to be saved.” The love of JESUS fills my soul, and
constrains me to write thus freely to you. O dear Sir, I love and
honour your pious father. Remember me in the kindest manner to the
good old man. I pray GOD, his last days may not be employed too much
in the non-essentials of religion. My heart is knit to the family.
GOD forbid, that any thing should hinder us from taking sweet counsel
together. GOD willing, I am to preach at _Falkirk_ on _Tuesday_
evening, and purpose to be at _Sterling_ that night, and to preach
twice there the next day. If it was thought advisable, I would collect
for the Orphan-house at _Georgia_ in the afternoon. The LORD be with
you, and all the family. Forget me not in your prayers.――I am a poor
unworthy wretch. As such, pray for

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCXLVIII.

                        _To Mr. H―――― H――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 15, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

IT would make your heart leap for joy, to be now in _Edinburgh_. I
question if there be not upwards of 300 in this city seeking after
JESUS. Every morning, I have a constant levee of wounded souls, many
of whom are quite slain by the law. GOD’s power attends the word
continually, just as when I left _London_. At seven in the morning, we
have a lecture in the fields, attended not only by the common people,
but persons of great rank. I have reason to think several of the
latter sort are coming to JESUS. Little children also are much wrought
upon. GOD much blesses my letters from the little orphans. He loves
to work by the most contemptible means. O my dear brother, I am
quite amazed, when I think what GOD hath done here in a fortnight. My
printed journals and sermons have been blessed in an uncommon manner.
I am only afraid lest people should idolize the instrument, and not
look enough to the glorious JESUS, in whom alone I desire to glory.
Congregations consist of many thousands. Never did I see so many
bibles, nor people look into them, when I am expounding, with such
attention. Plenty of tears flow from the hearers eyes. Their concern
appears various ways. I preach twice daily, and expound at private
houses at night, and am employed in speaking to souls under distress
great part of the day. I have just snatched a few moments to write
to my dear brother. O that GOD may enlarge your heart to pray for me.
This afternoon I shall preach out of town, and also to-morrow. Next
post, GOD willing, you shall have another letter. I walk continually
in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. The love of CHRIST quite strikes me
dumb. O grace! grace! Let that be my song. Adieu. My dear fellow-
traveller joins with me in hearty love to you all. I must away.

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXLIX.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Georgia._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 24, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

WITH very great difficulty I get time to write this. The LORD is doing
great things in _Scotland_. I preach twice daily to many thousands
with great power. I have collected here very near two-hundred pounds,
and have a prospect of collecting much more. Mr. _N――――_ has drawn
upon me for three hundred pounds sterling. I have paid two of it. Some
hundreds remain yet unpaid. GOD gives me to put my trust in him. I
have bought five hundred yards of cloth for the dear orphans winter’s
wear, and shall send you the other things you mentioned. I rejoice
to hear that the LORD is with you. I do not wonder at the contempt
you meet with, or the calumnies which are spread abroad. Remember
the burning bush. O my friend, my dear friend, how shall I thank you
for your prayers, care, and love? I am willing to wash all your feet.
Perhaps in the Spring, I may embark; but cannot yet determine. I have
written to you many letters, and I always remember you in my prayers.
I am glad to hear that you can go to market without money. The LORD
increase your faith. My dear brother, I love you in the bowels of
JESUS CHRIST. I will do what I can for Mr. _B――――_. I thank dear Mr.
_J――――_, from my heart, for his great kindness. I wrote to him and
to Mr. _B――――_, and near thirty more, a month ago. Expect also some
money shortly. I had rather bear any burden, than have my dear family
burdened. I thank Mr. _W――――_ for his care. His brethren here are well.
I have not time to tell you, how I love and esteem you for the care
you take of the dear lambs. I long to weep over you all. Excuse me for
not writing particularly. The LORD be with you all. As soon as I can
possibly redeem time, you shall hear again, my dear Mr. _H――――_, from

                     Ever yours in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCCL.

                    _To the Rev. Mr. R―――― E――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, Aug. 24, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Thank you for your kind letter. I believe it proceeded from love;
but, as yet, I cannot think the solemn league and covenant is any
way obligatory upon me. Indeed, dear Sir, you mistake if you think I
temporize on account of the orphans. Be it far from me. I abhor the
very thought of it. I proceed now, just as I have done ever since I
came out in the ministry; and so far from not setting a hedge about
our LORD’s garden, that was I called to it, I should set a much closer
hedge than that which the associate presbytery are planting. I should
enquire into people’s experiences, before I admitted them to the
LORD’s table. I would have church members meet in church fellowship,
and tell one another what GOD has done for their souls. You seem to
think I am not open to light. That I may give you satisfaction, I am
willing to confer with Mr. _W――――_ at _Perth_, where I am to be by
divine permission on _Thursday, September 3_. On _Tuesday_ next, about
four in the afternoon, I purpose preaching at _Dumfermling_.――I am
engaged to sup at your collegue’s house, but intend to lie at yours.
In the mean time be pleased to pray for me, and to remember my love to
all your family; and believe me, reverend Sir, to be

     Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLI.

              _To the Reverend Mr. O――――, at Aberdeen._

                                             _Perth, Sept. 3, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Have received two letters from you, which much affect me, knowing
how unworthy I am of such endearing expressions, or indeed of any
notice at all. But what shall I say? Grace! grace! JESUS loves me,
and so does his servant for JESU’s sake. O free grace! I am sorry to
find that any should insinuate, my not coming to _Aberdeen_ is owing
to your cold invitation. Such a thought never entered my heart, but
quite the contrary. The distance of the way, and my pressing call to
_England_, will keep me from you, and nothing else. I love and honour
you for my master’s sake. I should be glad to wash your feet, and if
possible I will yet see you. But if GOD should not permit me, dear Sir,
be not offended. The LORD is pleased to give me much freedom and power
in preaching. Congregations are every where large, and they have been
very liberal to my poor orphans. O that I was humble, and thankful!
I am the chief of sinners: I feel myself such. O the efficacy of
CHRIST’s blood! It is omnipotent; it hath saved me. Dear Sir, my heart
is melted down with the love of JESUS. He is a dear master. He hath
suffered no evil to befal me, as you have already heard. I have not
so much as hurt my foot against a stone. Help me to praise him. Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive all honour and glory and riches
and power and blessing! With much difficulty, I get time to send you
these few lines.――Reverend and dear Sir,

      Your very affectionate, obedient friend, younger brother,
                      and servant in the gospel,

                                                             _G. W._

P. S. For nine days past, I have continued preaching with great power
twice every day, to very large and affected auditories in many towns
and villages.


                            LETTER CCCLII.

                       _To the Rev. Mr. W――――._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 19, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THOUGH nature calls for rest, and I am to preach four times to-morrow,
yet I cannot go to bed without answering your kind letter. Blessed
be GOD for any good done at _Dundee_! Not unto me, not unto me, but
unto JESUS CHRIST be all the glory. Thanks be to GOD, I can yet send
you more glad tidings. At _Creif_ we had a most precious meeting. At
_Glasgow_ I preached ten times. The LORD was with me of a truth. The
congregations were very large, as were the contributions, and many
were brought under the deepest convictions. With great regret we
parted, and with great joy was received at _Edinburgh_. I had some
thoughts of abiding in _Scotland_ longer, but last night I received
a letter, which almost determined my return to _England_. Next
_Saturday_, GOD willing, I purpose to leave this place, and shall
return into these parts, if providence points a way, in the Spring. I
do not despair of seeing _Scotland_ like _New-England_. Reverend Sir,
for the present adieu. My poor body bids me to stop. O when shall I
sleep no more! I am exceedingly weary, but am affectionately, Reverend
and dear Sir,

   Your most unworthy and obedient brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLIII.

                   _To Mr. T―――― G――――, in London._

                                         _Edinburgh, Sep. 24, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

THIS serves to inform you, that on _Sunday_ last I preached here four
times, twice in a church, and twice in the fields; in the evening I
collected twenty pounds for the royal infirmary. On _Monday_ morning,
I visited the children in three hospitals, and preached in the evening
in the park; also at _Kinglassy_, _Aberdour_, and _Innerkeithing_, on
_Tuesday_ and _Wednesday_. On _Thursday_ I visited the prison, and in
the evening preached to the children of the city, with a congregation
consisting of near twenty thousand in the park. It is remarkable that
many children are under convictions, and every where great power and
apparent success attend the word preached. Calls to divers places,
are so numerous and importunate, that I think it my duty to stay
in _Scotland_ some time longer: being in haste, can say not more at
present. My love to all that love the LORD JESUS.

         Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLIV.

                _To the Right Honourable Lord L――――._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 25, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

THOUGH nature calls for rest, yet love and gratitude oblige me to
sit up to answer your Lordship’s letter, lest I should not have time
in the morning. Blessed be the glorious Redeemer! who seems in some
degree to be working upon your heart. My prayer to GOD is, that these
convictions may continue, ’till they end in a sound conversion. You
do well, my Lord, to fear, lest they should wear off. I have not had
so much acquaintance with the world as your Lordship; but I know it is
a deceitful thing, and without the utmost care and watchfulness, will
insensibly divert the soul from GOD. Your Lordship is in a dangerous
situation. A fear of contempt, and a love for honour, falsely so
called, render religion unfashionable amongst the rich and polite
part of mankind. But the blood of JESUS is almighty, and makes the
soul more than conqueror. Here is the fountain to which you and I
must apply, to wash away all our sins. And is it yet open for all
poor sinners? Come then, my Lord, and lay yourself at the feet of
the blessed JESUS. He can, he will, if you believe on him, abundantly
pardon you. But faith is the gift of GOD. I pray GOD to give you no
rest, ’till you have received the full assurance of faith. Then will
you recover your primitive dignity, trample earth under your feet, and
with your soul be panting after GOD. O my Lord, it is a blessed thing
to have fellowship with the Father, and with the Son. I am a poor
despised minister of JESUS CHRIST; but I would not change my Master
for ten thousand worlds. I have food to eat, that the world knows
nothing of. I long to have your Lordship taste of it too, and shall
as it were travail in birth ’till JESUS CHRIST is formed in you. Your
Lordship need not remind me to pray for you. Your eternal welfare is
much upon my heart. My Lord, now is the accepted time, now is the day
of salvation. The blessed spirit is now striving with you, and saying,
“My son, give me thy heart; what hast thou to do any more with idols?”
I hope your reply will be, “LORD, I give thee my heart, my whole heart,
and will no longer keep back from thee the least part.” Then will your
Lordship be truly happy; for so far as we are void of GOD, so far we
are miserable. But whither am I running? It is late; but your Lordship
desired a long letter, and therefore I have taken the liberty to write
freely. I am sensible of the honour put upon me by your Lordship,
and hope I shall never betray any trust reposed in me. I pray GOD
to sanctify this, and bless our fellowship when we meet together. I
thank your Lordship for your concern about the orphans. I am persuaded
you will in no wise lose your reward. I hope your Lordship received
my last letter, which gave an account of my intended preaching
at _Kinglassie_ and _Coupar_. May the glorious JESUS sanctify my
continuance in these parts, to the promoting his own glory and the
good of souls! I think I can say, “to me to live is CHRIST.” It
revives me to see so many seeking after JESUS. At _Kinglassie_ the
power was extraordinary. O free grace! that GOD should make use of
such a wretch as I am. I desire to lie humbly in the dust, and say,
“Why me, LORD, why me?” Fear not, my Lord, I have received remission
of sins by the blood of JESUS. Into his arms, I am just about
to commend your Lordship. I pray GOD to visit your soul with his
salvation; and hoping my humble respects will find acceptance with
your Lordship, your lady, and lady _Ann_, I beg leave to subscribe
myself,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLV.

                _To the Right Honourable Lord R――――._

                                      _Gallashiels, Sept. 28, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

YOUR letter I fear has been too long unanswered, but gratitude will
not permit me to defer answering it any longer. I have also received
your Lordship’s liberal benefaction for the orphans, for which and all
other favours, your Lordship hath my hearty thanks.――The innumerable
instances of GOD’s goodness quite melt me down. The word of GOD
prevails more and more. Every where JESUS CHRIST is getting himself
the victory in poor sinners hearts. Young and old from many quarters
fly to the gospel, as doves to the windows. I trust, your Lordship’s
daughters will feel the power of CHRIST’s blood. Happy they, who do
feel it. They rest in GOD. They are sons and daughters of the LORD
Almighty. What a rich person is the poorest christian? He is joint
heir with JESUS CHRIST. Supported with this thought, and feeling
the power of it in my soul, I can despise all sublunary enjoyments,
and long to be wholly swallowed up in GOD. Happy day, when we shall
converse with the world no more! I pray GOD to give me patience to
wait ’till JESUS comes. I would leap my seventy years, and fly upon
the wings of faith and love, into the blessed Redeemer’s presence. I
hope your Lordship is thus minded. May the glorious _Emmanuel_ keep
you so, ’till your soul is carried into _Abraham_’s bosom. This is the
hearty prayer of, my Lord,

      Your Lordship’s most obedient and obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLVI.

                 _To the Right Honourable lord L――――_

                                          _Edinburgh, Oct. 2, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

LAST night I returned from the south country, and receiv’d your
Lordship’s kind letter. My invitation to _Coupar_ was in the name
of many: who the persons were that signed the letter I cannot tell.
I have sent it inclosed in this. Had I known it to have been more
agreeable to your Lordship, I would have appointed the meeting at
_Melvill_; but I fear, as such public notice has been given, it
will be now impracticable. I cannot possibly stay with your Lordship
all _Tuesday_, being to preach at _Dundee_. But in my return from
_Aberdeen_, I hope to be at your Lordship’s house. I am glad your
Lordship intends to be at _Kinglassie_. I shall have both sermons
very early, and hope the glorious JESUS will be with us in our going
to _Melvill_. O my LORD, I want a thousand tongues to set off the
Redeemer’s praise. Having him, tho’ I have nothing else, I find I
possess all things. I have not forgotten your Lordship since I wrote
last. You are, and will be much upon my heart. I have heard of the
piety of your Lordship’s ancestors, and hope many prayers are yet in
store for you. Above all, I trust, JESUS prays for you, and then you
cannot but be a conqueror; nay, more than conqueror over the world,
the flesh and the devil. Take courage then, my Lord, and fear not to
follow a crucified JESUS without the camp, bearing his sacred reproach.
Beware of honour, falsely so called: dare to be singularly good, and
be not ashamed of JESUS or his gospel. O that you may find it to be
the power of GOD to your salvation! Look but to CHRIST by faith, and
your Lordship’s great possessions will not retard, but further and
promote your progress in the divine life. What sweet communion will
your Lordship then enjoy with GOD, in your walks and gardens? It will
then be a little paradise to your soul, and every thing you meet with,
will only draw you so much nearer to _Jehovah_, in whom all fulness
dwells. This I find by daily experience; and that your Lordship may
daily experience the same, is the earnest prayer, my Lord, of

             Your Lordship’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLVII.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                                         _Melvill, October 5, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

I Have, by the ship that brings you this, sent you 70 _l._ worth
of different sorts of goods to be disposed of, and the money to be
applied for the use of the _Orphan-house_. You are to let Mr. _B――――_
have 20 _l._ I have also sent 600 yards of cloth, a present of my own,
to make the boys and girls gowns and coats, some whereof I have had
made up here. The other things were given by various persons. Amongst
these, you will find some damask table-cloths, which I desire you
will sell, they being too good, in my opinion, for our use. O my dear
friend, how faithful is the LORD JESUS! He has now enabled me to pay
my brother, and Mr. _N――――_’s bill of three hundred pounds sterling.
There is yet 200 _l._ to be paid, which I borrowed since my arrival
in _England_; but very shortly I hope to discharge that also. I have
been in _Scotland_ about two months, and think to be here about a
fortnight longer. GOD is pleased to give me health, and to bless
my ministrations in an abundant manner. The little children in the
hospitals, are much wrought upon. Saints have been stirred up and
edified, and many others, I believe, are translated from darkness
to light, and from the kingdom of satan to the kingdom of GOD’s dear
Son. The good that has been done, is inexpressible. I am intimate
with three noblemen, and several ladies of quality, who have a great
liking for the things of GOD. I am now writing in an earl’s house,
surrounded with fine furniture; but glory be to free grace! my soul is
in love only with JESUS: he helps me more and more. I feel but little
straitness in preaching, and we have often sweet appearances of the
divine presence in our large assemblies. As to my own soul, it is
very comfortable and composed; I feel the power of JESUS more, and
the power of indwelling sin less. I am daily waiting for the coming of
the Son of GOD. I fear I am too impatient to be gone; but what can the
soul do, when sick of love? I have some thoughts of visiting _Ireland_.
Whether I shall do that, or come to _America_ in the Spring, GOD only
knows. I pray for, and long to see you and the rest of my dear family.
I trust, I then shall behold, what I long to behold, a houshold of
faith, a company of poor sinners walking in the simplicity and love
of the meek and lowly JESUS. O that you may so live, that whosoever
comes amongst you may say, “Surely GOD is in this place.” Thousands
of prayers are put up for us, and thousands of lies are spread abroad
against us. But JESUS enables me to fight my way through all, and I
am persuaded he will make me more than conqueror through his love. In
_England_, the work goes on well. Brother _C――――_ is much blessed in
_Wiltshire_; and brother _H――――_ wrote me word some time ago, that he
had examined about three hundred souls of our society, most of which
had been wrought upon since my return from _Georgia_. Help me to cry,
Grace! grace! My dear friend and brother, for the present adieu! I
love you in the bowels of a crucified JESUS. Brethren, pray for us.

                   I am ever, ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLVIII.

                     _To Mr. H―――― in Edinburgh._

                                         _Melvill, October 5, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

I Received your kind letter with the bill, and also that signed by you,
and my other friends at _Edinburgh_. I take all they say in good part,
but think some of their reasonings a little too worldly. The calumnies
of evil men are not to be regarded. I value them not in the least. My
largest donations have been from the rich and substantial. The mites
which the lower sort of people have given, I am persuaded will not
prevent their paying their debts, or impoverish their families. Mr.
_W――――_, in a letter to Mr. _S――――_, wishes there may be a private
contribution for myself; but I know nothing of, and will not admit of
any such thing. I make no purse; what I have, I give away.――Freely I
have received, freely I desire to give. “Poor, yet making many rich,”
shall be my motto still. My great and professed design, is to bring
poor sinners to JESUS CHRIST: but as my orphan family abroad is now
large, and daily to be provided for, without the least visible fund,
and I believe much glory will redound to GOD from that house; I think
it my duty to speak to those, who I believe, for CHRIST’s sake, are
willing to help them. I would have no one afraid of doing too much
good, or think, that a little given in charity will impoverish the
country.――May GOD reward you, and all others that have assisted me for
his dear Son’s sake! My poor prayers will always attend my _Scotch_
friends. When I shall go to _England_, I know not, but I hope GOD will
direct me. I must have done. Dear Sir, may the LORD be with you, and
be your ease in pain. My kindest respects attend your kind wife, and
all my dear friends. I thank you and them for their advice, and desire
to subscribe myself, with much affection, dear Sir,

          Your obliged, and affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLIX.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. M――――, at Dornock._

                                        _Aberdeen, October 9, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

SOME time past, I received a letter from your Presbytery of
_Sutherland_, and if I mistake not, with your name subscribed.
However, as I this night have seen your son, I think it my duty in
a letter to you, to thank the reverend presbytery for their kind
invitation; but as my stay in _Scotland_ is so short, and _Sutherland_
so far Northward, I cannot think of going thither at this time.
Notwithstanding, my prayer to GOD is, that the glorious gospel may
flourish in your hands, and that you may bring many, very many souls
to JESUS. This, reverend Sir, unless my heart deceives me, is my only
aim.

               _For this let men revile my name,
                  I shun no Cross, I fear no shame;
                All hail reproach, and welcome pain,
                  Only thy terrors, LORD, restrain!_

O, dear Sir, my heart is warmed with the love of JESUS; whilst I am
writing, the fire kindles. Amazing, that JESUS should suffer me to
speak for him! But what shall we say? His grace is free. Dear Sir,
help me to cry, Grace! grace! Surely I shall sing it in heaven. I
long to be there, but am willing to tarry the LORD’s leisure. Dear
Sir, excuse this freedom; I hope I am writing to one that loves JESUS.
I would write more, but must away to give a word of exhortation. That
the LORD JESUS may fill you with all joy and peace in believing, is
the hearty prayer of, Reverend and dear Sir,

          Your affectionate friend, brother, &c. in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLX.

                          _To Major M――――._

                                        _Aberdeen, October 9, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

BEING come thus far Northward, and hearing that you are this way, I
cannot forbear writing, though nature calls for sleep. I was concerned
I could not see you at _London_; but hope this will find you retired
from a noisy world, and walking with your dear spouse as becometh the
gospel of JESUS CHRIST. It is what I have longed and prayed for many a
time. I am of the same mind as formerly. Nothing but JESUS can satisfy
the soul. Aided by his Almighty power, I still go on through good
report and evil report, preaching the gospel. Blessed be GOD, I am not
ashamed of it. For, I find it, as do many others, to be the power of
GOD to our eternal salvation. O, dear Sir, I feel more and more of the
love of CHRIST every day. It is past expression. I hope ere now you
have had it shed abroad in your heart abundantly, by the Holy Ghost.
A letter informing me of this, will rejoice my soul. Be pleased to
direct to me at Mr. _T――――_’s, _Edinburgh_. GOD willing, I purpose
leaving _Scotland_ in about a fortnight. Whether I shall see you in
the flesh, I know not. However, since I know what GOD once did for
you, be not offended, if I charge you, dear Sir, not to let me miss
you at GOD’s right-hand in the great day. But GOD only can bring this
to pass: That you and your dear wife may be kept by his mighty power
unto salvation, prays, dear Sir,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLXI.

               _To Mrs. Ann D――――, at great Gransden._

                                        _Aberdeen, October 9, 1741._
  _My dear Sister_,

THIS evening your letter came to hand. Though it is past eleven at
night, and I have rode many miles this day, yet I cannot go to-bed
without sending you a line. I fear, by your manner of writing, you are
offended with me for my last letter. I knew very well, it would be a
trial to you; but I wrote out of pure love, and am glad it is now in
your power to clear your husband, which I much desired to do. I have
too many aspersions of the same nature cast upon me, not to sympathize
with you both. But JESUS is our advocate, and ere long we shall see
all the accusers of the brethren cast down. In spite of all, JESUS has
been, and is getting himself the victory in many sinners hearts. I am
yet carried on day by day, strengthened in body, and much refreshed
and comforted in soul. Your letter gives me a little present pain,
lest my last should have pained you. But GOD permits these things to
happen among ourselves, to teach us to look off from all creatures,
and to centre all our happiness in himself. Glory be to GOD for his
almighty love! At my first coming here, things looked a little gloomy;
for the magistrates had been so prejudiced by one Mr. _B――――_, that
when applied to, they refused me the use of the kirk-yard to preach in.
This Mr. _B――――_ is collegue with one Mr. _O――――_, at whose repeated
invitation I came hither. Though collegues of the same congregation,
they are very different in their natural tempers. The one is what they
call in _Scotland_, of a _sweet blooded_, the other, of a choleric
disposition. Mr. _B――――_ is neither a Seceder, nor quite a Kirk-man,
having great fault to find with both. Soon after my arrival, dear
Mr. _O――――_ took me to pay my respects to him; he was prepared for
it, and immediately pulled out a paper, containing a great number of
insignificant queries, which I had neither time near inclination to
answer. The next morning, it being Mr. _O――――_’s turn, I lectured and
preached; the magistrates were present. The congregation very large,
and light and life fled all around. In the afternoon Mr. _B――――_
officiated; I attended. He began his prayers as usual; but in the
midst of them naming me by name, he intreated the LORD to forgive the
dishonour that had been put upon him, by my being suffered to preach
in that pulpit; and that all might know what reason he had to put up
such a petition, about the middle of his sermon, he not only urged
that “I was a curate of the church of _England_,” but also quoted a
passage or two out of my first printed sermons, which he said were
grossly _Arminian_. Most of the congregation seemed surprized and
chagrined, especially his good-natured collegue Mr. _O――――_, who
immediately after sermon, without consulting me in the least, stood
up and gave notice, that Mr. _Whitefield_ would preach in about half
an hour. The interval being so short, the magistrates returned into
the session’s-house, and the congregation patiently waited, big with
expectation of hearing my resentment. At the time appointed, I went
up, and took no other notice of the good man’s ill-timed zeal, than to
observe in some part of my discourse, that if the good old gentleman
had seen some of my later writings, wherein I had corrected several of
my former mistakes, he would not have expressed himself in such strong
terms. The people being thus diverted from controversy with man,
were deeply impressed with what they heard from the word of GOD. All
was hushed! and more than solemn! and on the morrow the magistrates
sent for me, expressed themselves quite concerned at the treatment I
had met with, and begg’d I would accept of the freedom of the city.
But of this enough. The LORD, my dear sister, my support; let us both
continually fly to him, and then let men or devils do their worst.
CHRIST will by and by take away our reproach. Into his hands I commend
your spirit. Good night; the LORD be with you and yours! I hope to set
out for _England_ soon. Pray write when you hear of my arrival there,
and so convince me, that you are not angry with

    Your affectionate tho’ unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXII.

                    _To Mr. W――――, at Edinburgh._

                                       _Aberdeen, October 10, 1741._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Just snatch a few moments to answer your letter. Want of leisure
prevented my doing it before. I have not as yet seen your mother’s
memoirs. Happy are you in having such a parent. No doubt many prayers
are in store for you. As for your entering upon the ministry, I cannot
advise you, ’till you have gotten full satisfaction that you are
born again of GOD. I know more than one, who are ready to give up
their ministry for want of this; and as for my own part, I could not
feelingly press the love of GOD to others, unless I was sure of his
love to myself. I know not what may have passed between GOD and your
soul. You can tell, I suppose, whether or not GOD’s spirit witnesseth
with your spirit, that you are a child of GOD? For he that believeth,
hath the witness in himself. If you have got this with a moderate
share of learning, a good elocution and a burning love for precious
souls, then, I think you may do service in a public station. If godly,
and real experienced friends are for your entering into the ministry,
their advice is somewhat to be regarded. If their advice proceeds
from worldly motives, do not mind them at all. The discouragements you
meet with from some, are not worth your notice. If GOD loves you, he
will try you every way. Prayer, meditation, and temptation, are three
necessary qualifications for a gospel minister. I know not what to
say about your going to _Georgia_. In _Pensylvania_, and other places,
there are most noble opportunities of preaching the gospel of JESUS.
But I hope to be in _Edinburgh_ in about ten days, and then shall be
glad to converse with you. In the mean time, dear Sir, I commend you
to GOD, and desire you would not forget the unworthy creature, who now
subscribes himself

                        Yours in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXIII.

                    _To the Rev. Mr. J―――― W――――._

                                       _Aberdeen, October 10, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Brother_,

I Have for a long time expected that you would have sent me an answer
to my last; but I suppose that you are afraid to correspond with me,
because I revealed your secret about the lot. Though much may be said
for my doing it, yet I am sorry now, that any such thing dropped from
my pen, and I humbly ask pardon. I find I love you as much as ever,
and pray GOD, if it be his blessed will, that we may be all united
together. It hath been for some days upon my heart to write to you,
and this morning I received a letter from brother _H――――_, telling me
how he had conversed with you and your dear brother. May GOD remove
all obstacles that now prevent our union! Though I hold particular
election, yet I offer JESUS freely to every individual soul. You may
carry sanctification to what degrees you will, only I cannot agree
that the in-being of sin is to be destroyed in this life. O, my dear
brother, the LORD hath been much with me in _Scotland_. I every
morning feel my fellowship with CHRIST, and he is pleased to give me
all peace and joy in believing. In about three weeks I hope to be at
_Bristol_. May all disputings cease, and each of us talk of nothing
but JESUS, and him crucified! This is my resolution. The LORD be with
your spirit. My love to brother _C――――_, and all that love the
glorious _Emmanuel_. I am, without dissimulation,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXIV.

                          _To Peter B――――._

                                       _Aberdeen, October 10, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Write this, to ask pardon for mentioning your name in my answer to
brother _W――――_’s sermon. I am very sorry for it. Methinks I hear you
say, for CHRIST’s sake I forgive you. I thank you, and shall be glad
of a conference with you when I come to _London_. There have been
faults on both sides. I think, my dear brother, you have not acted
simply in some things. Let us confess our faults to one another, and
pray for one another, that we may be healed. I wish there may be no
dissention between us for the time to come. May GOD preserve us from
falling out in our way to heaven! The world and the devil are united
against us; O that we could all unite against them! “GOD is love,
and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in GOD.” I long to have all
narrow-spiritedness taken out of my heart. JESUS is able to deliver
me. His blood is Almighty. I trust I shall not rest, ’till I have felt
the full power of it in my soul. Blessed be GOD, I am still carried on
from conquering to conquer. JESUS causes me to triumph in every place.
I desire to lie as a poor sinner at his feet, and to cry, Grace!
grace! I find I am shortly to be called before the higher powers. Help
me, my dear brother, by your prayers. In about nine days I think to
leave _Scotland_. I commend you to JESUS, and desire to subscribe
myself, dear brother _B――――_,

              Yours affectionately in the bleeding Lamb,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLXV.

                     _To the Reverend Mr. C――――._

                                       _Aberdeen, October 13, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Received your letters, and am glad to hear that the glorious
_Emmanuel_ is pleased to countenance your ministry. May he smile on
you more and more, and make you the spiritual father of many children!
I have very great reason to be thankful to our common Saviour.
He hath been with me greatly, both in _England_ and _Scotland_. I
generally preach twice every day, sometimes three, even four times,
and generally expound in private every night. The LORD has fought many
battles for me, and still continues to make me more than conqueror
through his love. This morning I felt his power in the pulpit, and now
feel it much in my soul. O what a blessed thing it is, to have GOD’s
spirit witness with our spirit, that we are GOD’s children! This,
glory be to free grace! I have continually; and let me be in what
frame soever, my soul is waiting for the coming of the Son of Man.
Blessed be GOD, it will not be long ere I shall see him as he is.
The sight I have of him by faith, ravishes my soul: how shall I be
ravished when I see him face to face! “LORD, purify me, even as thou
art pure; for only the pure in heart see thee!” My dear brother, the
love of GOD now fills my soul. May you feel it shed abroad abundantly
in your heart! About Spring, perhaps, I may leave _England_. Forget
not to pray for me.

                       I am, dear Mr. _C――――_,
                     Ever yours in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXVI.

             _To the Right Honourable the Earl of L――――._

                                        _Brechen, October 17, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

I Would have wrote to your Lordship from _Aberdeen_, but could not
then determine when I should be at _Melvill_. This comes to acquaint
your Lordship, that, GOD willing, I hope to be at your Lordship’s
house on _Wednesday_ night, and to preach at _Coupar_ on _Thursday_.
I should be glad if the magistrates were apprized of it, and the tent
fixed in a more convenient place, and at a less distance from the
ground. I cannot tell your Lordship, how good the glorious _Emmanuel_
has been unto me. He has caused me to triumph in every place, and
fills my soul with joy unspeakable, even with joy that is full of
glory. I wish your Lordship was not almost, but altogether such
as I am, excepting my indwelling corruptions. O my Lord, none but
Christians know the pleasure of renouncing the world for GOD. I am
persuaded you felt unspeakable pleasure at _Coupar_. I hope those days
have continued with you. Happy are you in having a consort that will
forward you in the spiritual life. That you may both live together
as becomes heirs of the grace of GOD, and have all joy and peace in
believing, is the earnest prayer of, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXVII.

                  _To Mr. Thomas G――――, at London._

                                         _Dundee, October 21, 1741._
  _Dear Brother G――――_,

YOU will see, by the following, what GOD is still doing for me.
On _Wednesday_ night last I left _Aberdeen_, after preaching there
seven times, besides expounding in private. Before I came among them,
numbers were much prejudiced against me; but GOD was pleased to attend
my ministry with such power, that all opposition fell before me. Many
were brought under great convictions. The magistrates made me free of
the city; and the people much regretted my speedy departure from them.
On _Thursday_ last I preached at _Stonhithe_ and _Benham_; on _Friday_,
thrice at _Montrose_; on _Saturday_ twice, and on _Sunday_ thrice at
_Brechen_, and lectured in the evening at a private house. On _Monday_
I preached twice at _Forfar_; on _Tuesday_ twice at _Coupar_, in
_Angus_; and once at _Dundee_, five miles from _Coupar_, at four in
the afternoon, and again at night; here I have also preached twice
this day. The presence of GOD accompanies me more and more. Wherever
I have preached, I hear of the good fruits of it, both in convicting
sinners, and reviving saints. At _Dundee_, the concern among the
hearers is very remarkable. People are still more desirous to hear the
word. But, GOD willing, I purpose shortly to set out for _England_.
My dear brother, pray for me, that I may be humble and thankful. I am
glad to hear your wife is recovered. My love to her, and all friends.
I am, with cordial affection, Dear brother _G――――_,

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXVIII.

              _To the Right Honourable the Lord L――――._

                                      _Edinburgh, October 26, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

IT is now past eleven at night; all is wrapt in awful silence. My
soul is in a quiet composed frame. I have been giving your Lordship’s
letter a second reading, with aspirations to GOD whilst I perused it.
Surely GOD has not let me wrestle with him in vain. The Holy Spirit
seems to be moving upon the face of your soul. I trust GOD hath said,
“Let there be light,” and therefore there is light. O that the work
may be carried on, till you enter into that rest which remains for the
people of GOD. I trust your Lordship will now awake into a new world,
and know what it is to live by faith. Did I not know the power of
CHRIST’s blood, I should fear for you. But I commend you to a glorious
Redeemer, that will certainly take care of you. As I left your
Lordship’s house, I was thinking, that the narrow escape your Lordship
had between the stones, foreboded something good. JESUS has taken care
of you when in your blood. I hope he is now passing by you, and saying
unto you, “Live.” O that the stone of infidelity, which before lay at
the door of your heart, may be now rolled away! O that you may rise,
be loosed from your corruptions, and go about doing good! Satan will
not let you go without much opposition. He will desire to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat. But if JESUS prays for you, all will
be well. The comfort which you had with him in reading the psalms, is
a taste of the food believers daily eat, and which the carnal world
knows nothing of. My Lord, if you could be brought once to love secret
prayer, and to converse feelingly with GOD in his word, your heaven
will begin on earth; you will enjoy more pleasure than in all manner
of riches. What will those avail, if you are not rich towards GOD? Be,
therefore, my Lord, much in secret retirement. Commune with your own
heart in your chamber, and be still, and you will then hear the secret
whispers of the Holy Ghost. As for praying in your family, I intreat
you, my Lord, not to neglect it. You are bound to do it. Apply to
CHRIST for strength to overcome your present fears. They are the
effects of pride, or infidelity, or of both. After once or twice, the
difficulty will be over. O that the blessed Spirit may enable you to
make intercession with groaning that cannot be uttered! It rejoices me
to think, that I shall one day perhaps see a church in _Melvill_ house.
Happy, happy are you, my Lord, in having such a consort, who will
forward your Lordship in every good word and work. How sweet will it
be for you to go early to your devotions, striving to live like the
first happy pair, before they had eaten the forbidden fruit. As GOD
shall enable me, I shall bear you both upon my heart. GOD forbid that
I should sin against him in ceasing to pray for you. My riding upon
your Lordship’s horse, will often remind me to pray for the donor. My
Lord, you are upon my heart. Methinks I would undergo the pangs of the
new birth for you; but JESUS can carry you through. Fear not. Go on
in his strength, and your Lordship will be enabled to stand the shock
of all. I should be glad to hear, from time to time, what the LORD is
doing for your soul. Since your Lordship has laid your commands upon
me, I shall write as often as possible. If your Lordship is pleased
to write within this week, a letter may be directed to me at Mrs.
_J――――_’s, in _Abergavenny_. If afterwards, at Mr. _S――――_’s, Grocer,
in _Wine-street_, _Bristol_. Your Lordship may depend on my secresy;
no one hath seen your Lordship’s letter, but Mr. _S――――_, who copies
this, and who is as my own soul. His prayers, I trust, will benefit
your Lordship. His humble respects await both you and your lady. Once
more, I pray GOD to bless you both together. But it is late, the clock
has struck twelve. Methinks I could wish the cry was now made, “Behold,
the bridegroom cometh.” My soul longs to go forth to meet him. This
evening I was greatly refreshed by preaching on these words, “This
is my beloved, and this is my friend, oh daughters of _Jerusalem_.”
O when shall I see him as he is! Well may your Lordship say, “He is
altogether lovely.” The more you know him, the more you will have
reason to commend him. Eternity is too short to utter all his praise.
With a heart full of affection and thanks for all favours, I beg leave
to subscribe myself, my Lord,

             Your Lordship’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXIX.

                   _To Mr. J―――― C――――, at London._

                                      _Edinburgh, October 27, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

ALTHOUGH it be past eleven at night, yet I cannot miss a post. The
LORD is doing very great things here. At _Dundee_ the C―――― was very
extraordinary. On sabbath-day, the LORD enabled me to preach four
times, and to lecture in the evening at a private house. Yesterday
I preached three times, and lectured at night. This day JESUS has
enabled me to preach seven times. Once in the church, twice at the
girl’s hospital, once in the park, once at the old people’s hospital,
and afterwards twice in a private house. Notwithstanding, I am now as
fresh as when I arose in the morning. “They that wait upon the LORD
shall renew their strength; they shall mount on wings like eagles.” It
would delight your soul to see the effects of the power of GOD. Both
in the church and park the LORD was with us. The girls in the hospital
were exceedingly affected, and so were the standers-by. One of the
mistresses told me, she is now awakened in the morning by the voice
of prayer and praise; and the master of the boys says, that they meet
together every night to sing and pray; and when he goes to their rooms
at night to see if all be safe, he generally disturbs them at their
devotions. The presence of GOD, at the old people’s hospital, was
really very wonderful. The Holy Spirit seemed to come down like a
mighty rushing wind. The mourning of the people, was like the weeping
in the valley of _Hadadrimmon_. They appear more and more hungry.
Every day I hear of some fresh good wrought by the power of GOD. I
scarce know how to leave _Scotland_. I believe I shall think it my
duty to pay the inhabitants another visit as soon as possible. May
the LORD order my goings in his ways! Above five hundred pounds hath
been collected, in money and goods, for the poor orphans. Let all that
is within me praise GOD’s holy name. To-morrow, GOD willing, I shall
leave this place, and go through _Wales_, in my way to _London_. You
may hear from me on the road. At present, I must conclude; it is very
near twelve. I intreat you to pray and give thanks for, dear brother
_C――――_,

             Your’s most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCLXX.

              _To the Right Honourable the Lord L――――._

                                       _Abergavenny, Nov. 10, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

I Cannot bear the thoughts of forbearing to write to your Lordship
any longer. I know your Lordship will be pleased to hear that we had
a good journey. CHRIST’s presence made it so. The horse carried me
exceeding well. My heart was often drawn out to pray for the donor.
Does your Lordship’s soul prosper? Has JESUS said, “Be of good cheer,
it is I; be not afraid, thy sins are forgiven thee.” Can it yet be
said, “Behold, he prayeth.” I find a restraint upon me now, so that
I cannot write. GOD calls me to retirement; being to enter into the
marriage state to-morrow. I am persuaded your Lordship will not fail
to pray, that we may, like _Zachariah_ and _Elizabeth_, walk in all
the ordinances and commandments of the LORD blameless. I hope my most
humble respects will find acceptance with your Lady. Indeed, my Lord,
you are both much upon my heart. Though I have only liberty now to
subscribe myself, with all gratitude, my Lord,

      Your Lordship’s most obedient and obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXI.

                    _To Mr. T――――, at Edinburgh._

                                       _Abergavenny, Nov. 19, 1741._

THIS morning I received your kind letter; for which, and all other
favours, you have my most hearty thanks. I remembered you in prayer,
soon after your’s came to hand: blessed be GOD for the news which it
contained. I yet expect to hear of, if not to see far greater things
in _Scotland_. The LORD has begun, and he will carry on a work, which
shall make the ears of his enemies to tingle. I have enjoyed much of
the divine presence since we parted. On _Saturday_ I was married, in
the fear of GOD, to one who, I hope, will be a help meet to me. GOD
has been pleased to work, by my hands, since I have been in _Wales_.
O stupendous love! O infinitely condescending GOD! Be pleased to
direct your next to _London_. I hope to be there in about three weeks.
My wife I shall leave in the country for some time. Dear Mr. _T――――_,
pray for us. I do for you and yours. Labour after an abiding of GOD
in your soul, so that you may continually by faith see him who is
invisible. Do not be content with being a dwarf in religion: aspire
after the utmost degrees of inward purity and holiness. I could go on,
but must write some more letters. Dear brother _S――――_, and my dear
wife, salute you and all friends. They are not forgotten, dear Mr.
_T――――_, by

           Your most unworthy, but most affectionate friend
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXII.

          _To the Right Honourable Lady D――――, in Scotland._

                                           _Bristol, Nov. 22, 1741._
  _Honoured Madam_,

AT length I have a little leisure. I must improve it, by writing a
letter to your Ladyship. The many favours conferred on me, loudly
called for a more speedy acknowledgment; but hitherto, business for
my Master has prevented. Dear Mrs. _C――――_’s letter will inform your
Ladyship that I have altered my state; I trust for the better; for
I think my soul is more intimately united to JESUS CHRIST than ever.
I would humbly hope your Ladyship can say so too; for there is no
happiness till we can feel an union of soul with GOD. That, and
that only, as your Ladyship has often heard me assert, is true and
undefiled religion. Your own experience will best convince you of the
truth thereof. Your Ladyship enjoys great advantages, and glorious
means of making progress in spiritual things. You are rich in this
world’s goods; may GOD make you rich in faith and good works! My
Master will not forget the kindness you have shewn to one of the least
of his servants. It gives me comfort to think, what sweet freedom of
spirit I have enjoyed, when opening the scriptures in your Ladyship’s
house. Surely GOD was with us of a truth. The savour of it is not yet
gone off my own soul, nor, I hope, from your Ladyship’s also. Since I
left _Edinburgh_, I have put up many hearty prayers for you and your
family. The LORD make it an houshold of faith, and make you perfect,
entire, lacking nothing! The glorious _Emmanuel_ seems to be repairing
the breaches of his tabernacle, which were fallen down. In _Wales_ we
had much of the divine presence. The people there are so hungry after
the word, that they are resolved not to leave wrestling with the Most
High, till he shall be pleased to send me thither. O that GOD may
incline your Ladyship to intercede in my behalf! for I long to be
humble, and to lie low as a very poor sinner at the Redeemer’s feet.
I think I can say, he brings me nearer and nearer to himself daily;
and I will not rest, till I am moulded into the image of my bleeding
LORD. I pray GOD that your Ladyship may be content with no degrees
of holiness; but may be daily pressing forward, till you arrive at
the mark of the prize of the high calling in CHRIST JESUS. Mr. _S――――_
desires to join with me in sending our most affectionate respects and
thanks to your Ladyship and all friends. Our particular respects await
dear Mr. _McV――――_. I trust he will yet live to see glorious days of
the Son of Man. Surely CHRIST is getting himself the victory. May he
long reign king in your soul, and reward you a thousand-fold for every
token of love shewn to, honoured Madam,

            Your Ladyship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXIII.

             _To the Right Honourable the Earl of L――――._

                                           _Bristol, Nov. 24, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

MY heart longs to send you another letter. I wish, above all things,
that your soul may prosper. I had an extraordinary power given me to
pray for you lately in _Wales_. GOD gave me to wrestle, and I think an
assurance that I should prevail. I am looking out for an answer. Your
Lordship’s next letter, I hope, will afford me matter for rejoicing in
your behalf. Your Lordship is now entered on the field of battle: you
are engaged in a cruel, but a glorious warfare. Go on; though faint,
yet still pursue: _nil desperandum, Christo duce, auspice Christo_. My
prayer for your Lordship is this:

                _Give him a will, give him the pow’r,
                   Still equal to the war;
                 Great Captain of Salvation, thou
                   Thy trembling soldier chear!_

O, my Lord, it is a blessed thing to fight the Redeemer’s battles: I
find he makes us more than conquerors through his love. I still enjoy
much of the divine presence, and hope I pass from glory to glory daily.
I preach here at six in the morning, and also in the evening. GOD
causes his goodness to pass before us. In a week I hope to set out
for _London_. Be pleased to direct your next thither. The lords have
returned my appeal. At present, a hook is put in the leviathan’s nose.
“When a man’s ways please the LORD, he maketh his enemies to be at
peace with him.” I hope your Lady prospers both in body and soul.
My own, and dear fellow-travellers most humble respects and prayers
attend your whole houshold. I am, with great affection, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXIV.

                   _To T―――― E――――, in Edinburgh._

                                           _Bristol, Nov. 27, 1741._
  _My dear Friend_,

WHEN we parted, I promised your wife to write upon the road; but I
found it impracticable. Since I came to _Wales_ I have had no time.
Now I have, GOD gives me freedom. Though late, be pleased to accept a
letter of thanks for all favours. I think we felt each others spirits,
both, I trust, united mystically, really, and eternally to CHRIST, our
common head, and to one another in love. O that all would center here.
It would then be said once again, “See how these Christians love one
another.”――As for my own part, I am resolved not to rest till every
thing, contrary to true, catholic, christian love, be rooted out of
my soul. CHRIST’s blood and spirit are able to do this for me. I only
need to pray to GOD to make me willing to have it done. Be pleased to
help me, my dear friend, when GOD enables you to draw near unto him.
My dear companion would beg the same. Our tender love awaits both you
and your wife. I am lately entered into the marriage relation. JESUS
was called to; JESUS was present at the marriage. We have lately
enjoyed much of the divine presence. Many precious promises have been
pressed upon my soul. I believe I shall see greater things than ever.
We cannot expect too great things from GOD. But I must have done. I am
waited for. Accept these few lines in love, from

           Your affectionate friend and brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXV.

                      _To Mr. A――――, in London._

                                           _Bristol, Nov. 30, 1741._
  _My very dear Brother_,

I Thank you for your kind letter. Though I hope to see you on _Friday_,
yet love constrains me to send you an answer. I rejoice that your
soul is thirsting for holiness. GOD grant it may never cease till
you experience the full and glorious liberty of his children. I see
plainly how satan loves to drive to extremes. Since there is no such
thing as having the in-being of sin destroyed, he would not have
people press after a delivery from the power of it. This is also owing
to the corruption of our own hearts. The old man doth not love to be
crucified and slain; but I hope the language of your heart and mine is
this,

                _Reign in me, LORD, thy foes controul,
                   That would refuse thy sway;
                 Diffuse thy image thro’ my soul,
                   And bring the perfect day._

                _Scatter the last remains of sin,
                   And seal me thine abode;
                 O set me purified within;
                   A temple meet for GOD._

                _My root of holiness thou art,
                   For faith hath made thee mine;
                 With all thy fulness fill my heart,
                   Till I am wholly thine._

No wonder, when we come to be thus minded, if carnal ministers, and
carnal professors of all kinds, cry out against us. Nay, even some
who have tasted that the LORD is gracious, having slumbered and slept,
and mixed too much with the world, even such frequently fight against
their privileges, and rest in an infant state of piety. But, I believe,
the LORD will rouse them, and let the world know, what the blood of
JESUS can and will do. Blessed be his name, we have a growing church
at _Bristol_. Yesterday, and several other times, the LORD hath filled
many as with new wine. Sometimes I scarce have known whether I have
been in or out of the body; but, I find, the more I receive of grace,
the more I desire to lie as a poor, very poor sinner at the feet of
the wounded Lamb. Several have just now been with me, who have this
last week, especially yesterday, drank deep of divine love. They are
now full of the comforts of the Holy Ghost. I pray that they may walk
humbly with their GOD; for it is a good thing to know how to manage
a manifestation aright: nature so frequently and artfully blends with
grace, that, for want of a close watch and tender walk, we grieve the
Holy Spirit. Hence arise deadness and darkness in the soul. Unbelief
creeps in, the chariot wheels of divine love are taken off, and the
soul drives heavily. Let us, therefore, my dear brother, live a life
of great nearness to JESUS; and labour day by day to perfect holiness
in the fear of GOD. There is a glorious rest to be entered into even
here. May the LORD make us partakers of it! But why should I in the
least doubt it?

   _Thou wilt give strength, thou wilt give power, thou wilt in
        time set free:
    This, great Deliverer, let me hope; this, not for self, but
        Thee._

For the present, adieu!

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXVI.

                        _To Mr. J―――― H――――._

                                             _London, Dec. 7, 1741._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

I Came hither last _Friday_, and received a packet of letters from
_Bethesda_; but wonder to find none from you. When I read brother
_Grant_’s account of the circumstances of the family, I remember what
the LORD pressed upon my soul on ship-board, “The bridegroom shall
be taken from them, and then shall they fast in those days.” However,
be not discouraged; professor _F――――_’s students were once obliged
to sell their cloaths to buy candles. The work of GOD advances here
greatly. We have a large society, consisting of several hundreds, and
a noble place to meet in: I have called it a _Tabernacle_, because,
perhaps, we may be called to move our tents. In _Wiltshire_, and at
_Kingswood_, there are many good souls, and two new houses built. In
_Wales_ the door is opened wider than ever. From thence (_Abergavenny_)
the LORD has given me a wife. Her name was _James_, a widow, between
thirty and forty years of age. She has been a housekeeper many years.
Once gay; but, for three years last past, a despised follower of the
Lamb of GOD. I left her about three weeks ago, and am going to-morrow
to settle affairs, and to bring her up to _London_. I thank your
dear wife for her letter: had I freedom I would answer it: but I have
essayed several times before I could finish this. My sister _G――――_ is
dead: I trust she slept in JESUS. GOD is pleased to let me feel more
of his power than ever. O that his whole mind was in me! I hunger
and thirst after righteousness: blessed be GOD, there is a promise
that such shall be filled. By the letters sent with this, my dear
family will see that I have not forgotten them. No: I pray for them
continually. I cannot certainly tell when I shall leave _England_.
Providence detains me here. The work is very extraordinary in
_Scotland_. I hear daily accounts of its continuance and increase.
The door is opened in all places. The Lords see through Mr. _G――――_’s
enmity, and will have nothing to do with my appeal: so that a hook is
put into the leviathan’s jaws. I believe we shall see greater things
than ever. My dear friend, salute all most tenderly in my name; I am
exceedingly engaged, or each of them should hear particularly from,

                     Ever, ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXVII.

                _To the Right Honourable Lord R――――._

                                        _Gloucester, Dec. 19, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

THIS comes to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s kind letter,
dated _November 9th_. Business has prevented my answering it sooner.
The LORD is yet pleased to deal bountifully with me. In _England_,
as well as _Scotland_, the Redeemer is riding on from conquering to
conquer. About Spring I hope to see _Scotland_ again, and then, if
possible, I will come as far as your Lordship’s house. I have lately
been at _Bristol_, and _London_, and have had the pleasure of seeing
the church walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. I have preached
here twice every day, for some days last past. The LORD greatly
countenances my administrations, and gives me constant peace and
uninterrupted joy in believing. This is what, I trust, our glorious
_Emmanuel_ will confer upon your Lordship. CHRIST wills that our joy
should be full; but we entangle ourselves with the world, we indulge
ourselves in sensual pleasures, we trifle away our time in what the
world calls innocent diversions, and thereby we grieve the spirit of
GOD, and lose the comforts we should otherwise enjoy, from a close
walk and communion with GOD. Most complain of a deadness and leanness
in their souls; what is it owing to? Not to GOD, but to ourselves. We
leave GOD, and then GOD leaves us. Not that we can keep ourselves by
our own faithfulness; but notwithstanding, we must be faithful, and
workers together with GOD. I know not why I am led to write thus to
your Lordship, but nothing else occurs to my mind at present. I am
athirst for holiness myself, and long to see others athirst also. O
my LORD! I see such beauty and transcendent excellencies in CHRIST,
that I long to have his whole mind and image stamped upon my soul.
Nothing can satisfy me, but the highest degrees of sanctification and
inward holiness. Here, I believe, I am laudably ambitious. My Saviour
wills my sanctification, my Saviour would have me filled with all
the fulness of GOD. Even so LORD JESUS come quickly! Dear Mr. _S――――_
humbly salutes your Lordship, and prays for your temporal and eternal
welfare, with, my LORD,

        Your Lordship’s most obedient, obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXVIII.

                   _To Mr. J―――― C――――, at London._

                                        _Gloucester, Dec. 22, 1741._
  _My dear Brother_,

LAST _Thursday_ evening the LORD brought me hither. I preached
immediately to our friends in a large barn, and had my master’s
presence. On _Friday_ and _Saturday_ I preached again twice. Both the
power, and the congregation increased. On _Sunday_ GOD by a particular
providence opened a door for my preaching in St. _John’s_, one of the
parish churches. The late incumbent was my grand opposer. He being
dead, and the new minister not having taken possession, the power of
the pulpit was in the church-wardens hands. GOD inclined them to let
me preach there on _Sunday_ morning, and yesterday afternoon. Great
numbers came, and the LORD gave me unspeakable power. On _Sunday_
afternoon, after I had preached twice at _Gloucester_, I preached
at Mr. _F――――_’s at the hill, six miles off and again at night at
_Stroud_. The people seem to be more hungry than ever, and the LORD to
be more amongst them. Yesterday morning I preached at _Painswick_ in
the parish church, here in the afternoon, and again at night in the
barn. GOD gives me unspeakable comfort, and uninterrupted joy. Here
seems to be a new awakening, and a revival of the work of GOD. I find,
several country people were awakened when I preached at _Tewksbury_,
and have heard of three or four that have died in the LORD, who were
called under GOD by me. We shall never know what good field-preaching
has done, till we come to judgment. Many who were prejudiced against
me, begin to be of another mind, and GOD shews me more and more, “that
when a man’s ways please the LORD, he will make even his enemies to
be at peace with him.” To-morrow morning I purpose to set out for
_Abergavenny_, and to preach at _Bristol_, in _Wilts_, _Gloucester_,
and _Gloucestershire_, before I see _London_. The people in these
parts seem excellently well disposed. I hope the work of the LORD
prospers in your hand; though absent in body, I am present with you
in spirit. May the LORD _Jehovah_ comfort you continually with those
comforts wherewith I am comforted in him! I hope my comforts are of a
right nature; they humble at the same time that they exalt me. I find
all my happiness lies in a crucified GOD.

               _To the blest fountain of thy blood,
                  Incarnate GOD, I fly;
                Here let me wash my spotted soul,
                  From crimes of deepest dye._

               _A guilty, weak, and helpless worm,
                  Into thy arms I fall;
                Be thou my strength and righteousness,
                  My JESUS, and my all._

Pray for

            Your unworthy brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXIX.

              _To the Right Honourable the Lord L――――._

                                       _Abergavenny, Dec. 24, 1741._
  _My Lord_,

THIS day I received a letter from your Lordship, which, I find, your
Lordship wrote before my third and last came to hand, wherein I gave
your Lordship an account of the circumstance of my marriage. As soon
as I received your Lordship’s letter, I kneeled down and prayed, that
your Lordship might be entirely delivered from unbelief, and be made
a partaker of that faith, which will make you more than conqueror over
all. Blessed be GOD, for convincing you thus far. I hope the event
will prove, that JESUS is taking possession of your whole heart. Your
Lordship’s opinion of those who call themselves christians, is very
just. Free grace has opened your eyes. Your Lordship can therefore
join in the following verses, which I think applicable to your
Lordship’s case.

                                I.
             _Long did my soul in JESU’s Form,
                No comeliness or beauty see;
              His sacred name by others priz’d,
                Was tastless still, and dead to me._

                               II.
             _Men call’d me christian, and my heart
                On that delusion fondly staid;
              Moral my hope, my Saviour self,
                Till mighty grace the cheat display’d._

                               III.
             _Thanks to the hand that wak’d my soul,
                That shew’d me wretched, naked, poor;
              That sweetly led me to the rock,
                Where all salvation stands secure._

                               IV.
             _Glad, I forsook my righteous pride,
                My moral, tarnish’d, sinful dress;
              Exchang’d my loss away for CHRIST,
                And found the robe of righteousness._

If your Lordship from your soul can sing thus, fear not that JESUS
will leave you.

             _O unbelief, injurious bar,
              Source of tormenting fruitless fear;
              Wherein thy loud objections fall,
              “Tis finished,” still shall answer all._

Remember, my Lord, the Redeemer’s love is everlasting. If he has
passed by, and said unto you “Live,” you shall live for evermore;
for whosoever liveth and believeth in JESUS, shall never die. Does
my Lord believe this? Then welcome into the new world, welcome among
the despised _Israel_ of GOD, welcome into the Mediator’s kingdom,
where you shall have all peace and joy in believing. When first I was
awakened,

              _Refreshed, I thought my joys compleat,
                 When lo! Immanuel’s bounties rise;
               Still fresh discoveries he unfolds,
                 The lovely treasures yet surprize!_

My Lord, I now wonder no longer at the choice of _Moses_. Well might
he count the reproach of CHRIST of more value than all the riches of
_Egypt_. GOD forbid, therefore, that you or I should henceforth glory,
save in the cross of CHRIST. It will be more honour to be a suffering
servant of CHRIST, than to be the king’s commissioner. Your Lordship
will pardon this freedom. Methinks I hear you say, “There is no
comparison.” Indeed there is none. I would not change my post for ten
thousand kingdoms. Blessed be GOD, that has given you a distant view
of the emptiness of all things here below, and the insufficiency of
every thing to make us happy besides GOD. May these things be realized,
and stamped upon your Lordship’s heart! Then what a happy creature
will your Lordship be? How will it rejoice me to see your Lordship
next Spring. I know not but my friends prayers may draw me there,
about that time. In the mean while, I pray GOD from time to time to
grant you a growth of grace, that you may know what it is to abide in
GOD, and have a constant indwelling of the Holy Ghost. I rejoice to
hear that lady _Ann_ seems to look heavenward. May JESUS make her a
wise virgin! For her encouragement, I have sent an extract of a letter
lately sent to me by a friend in _London_; and that your Lordship
may know how it is with me, I have sent a copy of a letter I wrote to
that friend a day or two ago. Last night I came hither, and preached
this afternoon. I purpose shortly to go to _Gloucester_, _Bristol_,
_Wiltshire_, and so to _London_. The church there as well as elsewhere
flourishes. The time for favouring _Zion_, I believe, is indeed come.
You see, my Lord, how long my letters are, when I have freedom and
leisure. I have thought several times to write to your Lordship, but
was restrained till I received your Lordship’s letter this morning.
Be pleased to direct your next to be left with Mr. _P―――― S――――_,
_Leadenhall-street_, _London_. My prayers shall follow this. O may
JESUS breath upon it, and then it must be blessed to your soul! I
heartily and humbly salute the elect lady your wife.――May you both be
filled with all the fulness of GOD! My dear wife and Mr. _S――――_ join
heartily with me. We all plead at the throne of grace in your behalf,
and GOD alone knows, how often you are remembered and wrestled for,
by, my Lord,

             Your Lordship’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXX.

              _To the Right Honourable Lady Mary H――――._

                                       _Abergavenny, Dec. 24, 1741._
  _Honoured Madam_,

THIS morning I received your Ladyship’s kind letter; when perused,
I laid it before the LORD of all Lords, and prayed for you and yours
with all my power. My dear wife and Mr. _S――――_ joined heartily with
me, and by this send their most humble respects. We do not despair of
waiting upon your Ladyship next Spring: but ere that time, we may be
all launched into the world of spirits, where we shall sing glory to
him that sitteth upon the throne for ever. Does not your Ladyship long
for that happy hour? Methinks I hear you ready to say

                                 I.
            _How long, great GOD! how long must I,
             Immers’d in this dark prison lie?
             When shall I leave this dusky sphere,
             And be all mind, all eye, all ear?_

                                 II.
            _I long to see that excellence,
             Which at such distance strikes my sense;
             My soul attempts to disengage
             Her wings from this her earthly cage._

                                III.
            _Wouldst thou, Great Love, once set her free,
             Hast’ning she’d quick unite to thee;
             She’d for no guardian angels stay,
             But fly and love thro’ all the way._

This, I believe, was the language of your honoured mother’s heart, who
is now joined with the heavenly choir above. Methinks I hear her say,
“Daughter, follow me as I followed CHRIST; aspire after the highest
degrees of holiness, for the more holy you are, the nearer shall you
sit to the GOD-Man CHRIST JESUS, the deeper insight shall you have
into the beatific vision.” This, honoured Madam, is a great motive to
my soul to copy after my glorious JESUS. Blessed be GOD, that made my
letter savory to your soul. For this, and all other mercies, I desire
to lie in the dust, and kiss the Redeemer’s feet. I do not wonder that
_Mary_ loved to sit there: I do not wonder that another _Mary_ wiped
them with the hairs of her head. Was my LORD here, I should wish for a
thousand alabaster boxes of ointment, to break for him. But JESUS says,
“Give me thy heart, and I desire no more.” My soul replies,

             _Take my poor heart, and let it be
              For ever clos’d to all but thee;
              Seal thou my breast, and let me wear
              That pledge of love for ever there._

             _How blest are they who still abide,
              Close shelter’d in thy bleeding side;
              Who life and strength from thence derive,
              And by thee move, and in thee live._

O honoured Madam, I am amazed at JESUS’s love. I willingly, join with
you in saying, “Amen, Hallelujah! Worthy, indeed, is the Lamb that was
slain.” I bless GOD for enlarging your heart, and giving you freedom
to write. It is sweet to communicate our thoughts of JESUS. I hope
the LORD will bless this to your Ladyship, and reward you for all past
favours. My humble respects attend Mr. _H――――_, and my hearty love to
your little lambs. I prayed for them this morning. When I go to town,
I hope to wait upon the _Marquis_.――――I have been a short circuit into
_Gloucestershire_, and find the divine presence accompanying me more
and more. O that I was humble! O that I was thankful!

                                 I.
               _And can it be that I should gain
                  An interest in the Saviour’s blood?
                Died he for such as caus’d his pain,
                  Sinners who him to death pursu’d?_

                                II.
               _’Tis mystery all, Messiah dies;
                  Who can explore this strange design?
                In vain the curious seraph tries
                  To sound the depths of love divine._

But whither am I going? Your Ladyship will excuse me; whilst I am
writing, the fire kindles.

                   _Thro’ all eternity to GOD,
                      A grateful song I’ll raise;
                    But O eternity’s to short,
                      To utter all his praise._

With expectation of another letter, and with hearty prayers for your
temporal and spiritual welfare, I subscribe myself, honoured Madam,

                  Your Ladyship’s obedient servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXXI.

                  _To Mr. Samuel M――――, in London._

                                           _Bristol, Dec. 28, 1741._
  _Dear Mr. M――――_,

BOTH my wife and I received your letters. I send this, to thank you
for them. I came from _Abergavenny_ on _Saturday_ night. My dear wife
was pretty well; I expect her here on _Friday_. We shall bring no
more goods to _London_, than we shall use; but I know not what to
say about coming to your house, for brother _S――――_ tells me, you
and your family are dilatory, and that you do not rise sometimes till
nine or ten in the morning. This, dear Mr. _M――――_, will never do for
me; and I am persuaded such a conduct tends much to the dishonour of
GOD, and to the prejudice of your own precious soul. Sometimes I have
looked upon you with grief; you have busied yourself about the outward
affairs of religion in respect to others, and all the while I fear
neglected to look into, and study the improvement of your own heart.
I think you go backwards instead of forwards. I fear your present
business will not answer, and I am sure you will have no solid comfort,
till you look less abroad and more at home. Somebody said, you was
like the _Athenians_, who desired to hear some new-thing. I thought
the observation was too just. You are jealous about principles, (which
is right) but all the while your own practice is not sufficiently
watched over. I have heard that you spend much time in coffee-houses,
and from your own house. I hope these things are not so; and it is
with grief and out of tender love that I now mention them to you. For
some time I felt my heart quite locked up from writing to you. Mr.
_M――――_ will not be offended with me for this plain dealing. You know
I love you, and I am sure this letter proceeds from love. I know too
much of my own weakness and infirmities to insult others; and when a
brother is overtaken in a fault, I desire to restore him in the spirit
of meekness. But I know how much the glory of GOD is concerned in our
walk. The eyes of the world are now in an especial manner upon you.
How holy ought you and I, dear Mr. _M――――_, to be, in all manner of
conversation and godliness! Labour therefore, my dear brother, to get
an abiding presence of GOD in your heart. Be willing to be searched.
Pray that you may feel the full power of the Redeemer’s blood; and
walk in the continued comforts of the holy ghost. Be not slothful in
business. Go to bed seasonably, and rise early. Redeem your precious
time: pick up the fragments of it, that not one moment may be lost.
Be much in secret prayer. Converse less with man, and more with GOD.
Accept this advice, given in great love. I purpose staying here about
a fortnight. Dear Mr. _M――――_, I am

              Your affectionate though unworthy brother,
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXXII.

                 _To the Rev. Mr. W――――, at Dundee._

                                           _Bristol, Dec. 30, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Should blame myself much, for not writing to you before now, was I
conscious it was owing to any wilful neglect: but my master’s business
hath so engaged me, that I really have not had an opportunity. GOD
gave us a sweet journey to _England_. Since my return hither, I have
been at _Gloucester_, _Bristol_, in _Wales_, and at _London_, and
have great reason to bless our _Emmanuel_ for what he has done for
his church. My soul hath drank largely of the divine love. I have been
carried as on eagles wings, and am now better in health than perhaps
ever since I have been in the ministry. I preach here twice daily.
In about a fortnight, I shall remove to _London_, where I purpose to
continue, GOD willing, till the weather permits of field-preaching
again. About Spring, if Providence favours, I hope to pay you a second
visit. In the mean while, I should be glad to hear from you, what
fruits you have seen spring from my first. I hope the LORD will make
your latter end greatly to increase. I shall rejoice to hear of your
success. My soul is much engaged for poor _Scotland_. I shall be glad
to hear who has succeeded the good Mr. _W――――_ of _Perth_. Ah dear
man! He is now gone into the world of spirits, where there is no
seceding, but all join in one common strife, who shall praise their
LORD and master in the most exalted strains. I long to follow, but
desire patiently to wait till my blessed change come. What a comfort,
dear Sir, is it to think, that death is conquered. How sweet to be one
of CHRIST’s waiting servants! It is a blessed post! And such honour
belongs to all his saints. Thanks be to GOD for this unspeakable gift.
Dear Sir, whilst I am writing, the fire kindles. I long to leap my
seventy years. Welcome eternity; I want to see time swallowed up. But
I must have done, having other letters to write. My kind love to your
household and all friends. I hope ere long you will send a line to,
reverend and dear Sir,

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXXIII.

              _To the Reverend Mr. O――――, at Aberdeen._

                                           _Bristol, Dec. 30, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Long to write you a line, to testify the undissembled love my
soul bears towards you. I also long to hear what JESUS hath done at
_Aberdeen_. I believe he sent me thither, and I am persuaded he did
not send me there in vain. I have experienced fresh wonders of mercy,
since I saw you. The LORD has blessed my ministry in _England_, and in
_Wales_, where I trust I was married _in the_ LORD; and as I married
for him, I trust I shall thereby not be hindered, but rather forwarded
in my work. O for that blessed time when we shall neither marry nor
be given in marriage, but be as the angels of GOD! My soul longs
for that glorious season. Perhaps, sometimes I am too impatient. But
who that has tasted of JESUS ’s love, can forbear longing to be with
him? I long to see him as he is, and my soul will never be compleatly
satisfied till I arise after his divine likeness. This, I believe, is
the desire, and frequently the frame of dear Mr. _O――――_’s soul. But
I believe we both have crosses to take up, and many trials to undergo,
before we shall be admitted to the beatific vision. Alas! What a
stranger am I to the meekness which was in JESUS? How much acrimony
is there in my temper, that wants to be taken away? Blessed be GOD,
my Saviour is omnipotent. He can, he will deliver me. He can, he will
conform me to himself. I think I can sing these lines,――

               _My root of holiness thou art,
                  For faith hath made thee mine:
                With all thy fulness fill my heart,
                  Till all I have be thine._

Dear Sir, what a fulness is there in JESUS? What a pity is it, that we
should not draw largely out of it? Why should we be content with low
degrees of holiness? Why should we be always dwarfs in religion? I am
quite ashamed of my low stature. I am an unprofitable servant. O dear
Mr. _O――――_, pray for me, that the LORD may purge me, and that I may
bring forth more fruit. I have lately been at _London_, _Gloucester_,
_Wilts_, and _Wales_. The work of the LORD prospers. I preach here
twice every day. That GOD may bless and reward you all, is the earnest
prayer of, dear Mr. _O――――_,

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXXIV.

               _To the Rev. Mr. W――――, at Gallishiels._

                                       _Bristol, December 30, 1741._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

THE love of JESUS constrains me to trouble you with a letter at this
time. Nothing but his work should have prevented my writing to you
sooner. But you know how it used to be with me. O how little do I for
JESUS, who has done so much for me! I abhor myself in dust and ashes.
I run to hide myself in his wounds. His righteousness, his blood alone
can recommend me to the Father. O that I was like CHRIST, that his
whole mind was wrought in my soul! I am now panting after his image;
I am now thirsting after his purity and holiness; help me, dear Sir,
help me by your prayers, that I may feel the power of the Redeemer’s
blood. He hath done great things already for me; but as yet I
have asked nothing. Greater things are yet before me. There is an
inexhaustible fulness, out of which the Redeemer would have me draw
continually. O for faith, for strong faith!

             _I more would bless, I more would thank,
              I more would live to Jesu’s praise._

Since my return, I have been visiting the churches. They grow and
increase daily. I preach twice every day. The LORD is among us. I
hope I shall hear the same from you. In about fourteen days I go to
_London_. About Spring I hope to see _Scotland_ once more. I have good
news from the Orphan-house. As yet, I have not freedom to write out
the sermon which you mention. Through inadvertence, I did not send
you Mr. _M――――_’s letter. GOD’s time is best. Perhaps disputes about
church-government had better subside. I am determined to know nothing
but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. Be pleased to remember me to
dear Mr. _O――――_, at _Kelso_. I hope he behaves like a good soldier of
JESUS CHRIST. My kind respects attend your son. Be pleased to accept
of the same in a most tender manner from dear Mr. _S――――_, and from,
dear Sir,

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCLXXXV.

                   _To Mr. R―――― S――――, in London._

                                            _Bristol, Jan. 2, 1742._
  _My dear Brother S――――_,

I Find freedom to answer your kind letter immediately. I thank GOD for
blessing my writing to your poor soul. Your salvation I long, and pray
for. So that souls are built up in their holy faith, let the Redeemer
make use of what instrument he pleases. Brother _Robert_, it is a
blessed thing to have always a Catholic spirit. I am persuaded, JESUS
will give it to me. I am resolved never to rest, ’till self-love,
bigotry, prejudice, and all narrowness of spirit be expelled out of my
soul. Blessed be the Redeemer’s free grace! I see more and more into
the inward recesses of my mind. Dear _Robert_, there is such a thing
as passing from glory to glory. For JESUS CHRIST’s sake, strive to
enter in at the straight gate, and never cease striving ’till you
enter into that rest which awaits the people of GOD. It is a sweet
thing to abide in JESUS’s wounds, and from a feeling possession
of GOD in the heart, to be able to say, “My fellowship is with the
Father and the Son.” It is true we are not to live, or rely on our
frames. The righteousness of JESUS CHRIST alone, and not our doings
or sufferings, can recommend us to the Father. But however, we ought
always to labour to be in a sweet and humble frame, and be watchful
against any thing whatever, that may interrupt our communion with GOD.
Peace and joy should flow in a believer’s soul, like a river. If any
thing should obstruct the passage, he should not rest ’till faith
overflows, and drives it away before him. I know not what others may
say, but thro’ grace I can sing with bishop _Ken_,

                _“To my soul it’s hell to be,
                  But for a moment void of thee.”_

O the fulness that there is in CHRIST! It fills my heart, and out of
the abundance of my heart my pen writeth. Dear _Robert_, may the LORD
bless it to your soul, and that will greatly rejoice

         Your most unworthy, though most affectionate friend,
                    brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXXVI.

                   _To Mr. I―――― H――――, in London._

                                            _Bristol, Jan. 2, 1742._
  _My dear Brother H――――_,

I Owe you a letter, and very much love. I thank you for calling to
see me, when last in _London_. May the love of JESUS be shed abroad
abundantly in your heart by the Holy Ghost. My soul is now thirsting
after the Redeemer’s love. I trust you and I, and all the brethren,
shall watch and pray against every thing in our hearts, that is any
way selfish, or contrary to the boundless love of our exalted head.
I long after a solid, real, undissembled union with all that bear the
Redeemer’s image. If I know any thing of my heart, I care not how the
old man be crucified and cut to pieces, so that I may put on the new
man, which is created after GOD in righteousness and true holiness.
Blessed be the free, rich, and sovereign grace of our glorious
Redeemer! who has begun the good work in my soul. Great, very great
things hath JESUS done for me, a worthless worm: but I see infinitely
greater things lying before me. There is an inexhaustible fulness
in JESUS CHRIST, out of which I hope to draw to the endless ages of
eternity. O the meekness, the love, purity and holiness, that is in
JESUS. Why should we be dwarfs in holiness? If CHRIST came into the
world, that we might have life, and so much the more abundantly, why
should we not ask and seek for it, especially since we are sure to
obtain? My dear brother, you see how free I write. Love constrains
me to do so. O that I was a flame of fire! I have lately been
at _Gloucester_. The LORD was with us of a truth. In _Bristol_,
GOD attends me with his mighty power. Last night JESUS rode on
triumphantly indeed. Sometimes my heart is so full, that I am tempted
to think

               _――――My joy complete:
                When lo! |Emmanuel’s| mercies rise,
                Still fresh discoveries he unfolds,
                The lovely treasures yet surprize._

Unbelief says, this will not hold to-morrow; when lo, “to-morrow is
as the day past, and much more abundant.” I find there is yet oil,
if there be yet a vessel, and an empty heart to contain it. Pray that
my heart may be emptied of self, and that JESUS may be my all in all.
I pray GOD, that none of us may give in to narrowness of spirit, but
look up to JESUS for power over self, in all its shapes. Yesterday
I went to hear Mr. _C――――_. The LORD helped him, I believe, in some
part of his discourse. I would be free; I would meet more than half
way; but we are all too shy. The LORD fill his soul with more of
the disinterested love of JESUS. To-night I begin a general monthly
meeting to read corresponding letters. Pray give thanks for the
success of the gospel in my unworthy hands. It shall be returned,
as JESUS shall enable

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCLXXXVII.

                     _To Mrs. K――――, in London._

                                            _Bristol, Jan. 4, 1742._
  _My dear Sister_,

THIS morning, in a letter from brother _C――――_, I heard that your
dear husband was dangerous ill of the small-pox. I was touched with
a tender sympathy of your case; I immediately kneeled down, and laid
your circumstances before our compassionate high-priest. I doubt not,
but he is touched with a feeling of your afflictions, and will give
you grace to help in time of need. I hope the language of your heart
is this:

             _Thy gifts, if call’d for, I resign,
                Pleas’d to receive, pleas’d to restore;
              Gifts are thy work, it shall be mine
                The giver only to adore._

I was, before I received the news of your dear husband’s illness,
thinking that GOD’s people must meet with uncommon trials. We shall
often find GOD’s providences as it were contradicting his promises.
Thus it was with _Abraham_ and _Jacob_, and thus I believe it is in
some degree or other with all the children of GOD; for otherwise, how
can faith be exercised? I doubt not but the enemy of souls will now be
very busy with you, and break in with his fiery darts upon your soul;
but I pray JESUS to keep you from staggering through unbelief. May you
be strong in faith, giving glory to GOD! Against hope, may you believe
in hope. However your husband may be disposed of, my prayer for you
is, “LORD! make her still and resigned.” I think the love of CHRIST
constrains me to write you this letter. Who knows but the LORD may
bless it to your soul? However, as you love the LORD JESUS, I hope
you will receive it as a token of unfeigned christian sympathy and
affection from, dear Sister,

          Your most unworthy brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCLXXXVIII.

                   _To Mr. Peter S――――, in London._

                                            _Bristol, Jan. 7, 1742._

I Have been obeying your request: I mean, bowing my knees before the
GOD and Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST in your behalf. O that he may
live before thee; that he may escape the pollutions that are in the
world through lust; that he may be filled with all the fulness of GOD,
was the breathing and language of my heart. I trust the LORD is now
working upon brother _S――――_. He seems to have had some discoveries of
the Redeemer’s love. May my dear _Peter_ receive the full assurance of
faith, and be truly fixed upon the rock of ages! “Even so LORD JESUS
come quickly. Amen and amen.” Excuse my writing to you in this manner,
but GOD has put into my heart such an undissembled love for you,
and your dear brothers, that I cannot be satisfied ’till I see the
Redeemer’s love shed abroad in all your hearts by the Holy Ghost. Ah
_Peter_, _Peter_, I trust JESUS prays for thee, and then the world
shall not steal away thy heart from GOD. Satan hath been sifting me
severely, these two or three days. I have had some close combats with
the great dragon, but JESUS hath gotten himself the victory. I am
enabled greatly to rejoice. For, “Blessed is the man that endureth
temptations; when he ♦is tried, he shall receive the crown of life.”
The brightness of it, even at this distance, dazzles my sight. Yet
a little while, and JESUS CHRIST shall give it unto us. Dear brother
_K――――_ has got the start of us. Happy man! He is at the end of his
race. I sympathize with, and have been praying for his surviving
friends. The LORD enable us all to walk so circumspectly, that the
common enemy may not have an occasion to speak reproachfully of
us. But whither am I running? Excuse me, dear _Peter_. GOD gives
me freedom in writing to, and praying for you. I hope dear brother
_R――――_ received my last in good part. GOD only knows how the
happiness of both of you is longed for by, dear brother,

                    Yours in the crucified JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘his’ replaced with ‘is’


                          LETTER CCCLXXXIX.

                   _To Mr. J―――― C――――, in London._

                                        _Gloucester, Jan. 28, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

ON _Friday_ last I left _Bristol_, having first settled affairs
almost as I could wish. At _Kingswood_, I administred the sacrament.
On _Wednesday_ night it was the lord’s passover; on _Thursday_ we
had a sweet love-feast; on _Friday_ the lord was with me twice at
_Tockington_; on _Saturday_ morning I broke up some fallow ground at
_Newport_, by preaching with power to about two thousand people, and
in the evening to many thousands at _Stroud_ with wonderous power; on
_Monday_ morning at _Painswick_, and ever since twice a day here. Our
congregations I think are larger than at _Bristol_. The word proves
sharper than a two-edged sword. Every sermon is blessed. These words
follow, “I have much people in this city.” I am just now going to
_Chafford_. To-morrow I expect my wife. In my next, I will send you
word what I intend to do. I was one day at _Bath_. I should be glad
to see brother _R――――_’s defence before it be published. I told him
of it; I believe he will be upon his guard. His soul prospers. Sinless
perfection I fear will be propagated in these parts. The LORD in his
due time will root out that pernicious weed. I thank you for writing
to me. Pray write to me often. GOD willing, I shall examine _Hampton
Society_ to-night. The same I think to do in _Wiltshire_. I want to be
in _London_ as soon as may be. Pray that I may know the LORD’s will.
We must away to _Chafford_. The LORD be with you, and abundantly
refresh you. My most tender love awaits all. Brethren, pray for

                 Yours most affectionately in JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXC.

                    _To the Rev. Mr. G―――― T――――._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 2, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Brother_,

I Have longed for some time to send you a line, and have wondered that
I have heard no oftener from you; but as I know my own circumstances,
I can the more easily guess how it is with you. GOD has been very good
to me since my arrival. I found when I came at first, I had all my
work to begin again. Brother _W――――_ had so prejudiced the people
against me, that those who were my spiritual children would not so
much as come and see me; nay they have gone by me whilst preaching
in _Moor-fields_, and stopped their ears. This I find in some measure
hath been your case, and GOD wisely permits this, to teach us to
cease from man. _Paul_’s Epistles to the _Galatians_ much comforted
me. Besides, I was embarrassed with brother _Seward_’s death. He died
without making any provision for me, and I was at the same time much
indebted for the Orphan-house.――But all this was to humble and prepare
me for future blessings. The LORD hath enabled me, blessed be his
name, to keep steady to my principles and usual practice. A new and
numerous church has been raised at _London_. In _Essex_, the LORD
was wonderfully with me. Every where the congregations increase. In
_Bristol_ GOD enabled me to fight my way through. We have hired a
large hall, and have expounded there twice a day. In _Scotland_, the
work, for its beginning, is rather greater than at _New-England_. I
hear continually of the seed sown increasing, and springing up. GOD
willing, I purpose paying _Scotland_ another visit. I have lately
been at _Bristol_, and both there, and here, and also at _London_,
the word runs and is glorified. Through the tender mercies of our GOD,
I have been carried as on eagles wings through a variety of outward
and inward trials. The greatness of which none knows but GOD and my
own soul. About eleven weeks ago I married, in the fear of GOD, one
who was a widow, of about thirty-six years of age, and has been a
housekeeper for many years; neither rich in fortune, nor beautiful as
to her person, but, I believe, a true child of GOD, and would not, I
think, attempt to hinder me in his work for the world. In that respect,
I am just the same as before marriage. I hope GOD will never suffer
me to say, “I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.” I am
glad that matters are settling so amicably at _Philadelphia_. What a
pity is it, that we should fall out in the way to heaven! I would do
any thing except defiling my conscience, and giving up what I think
is truth, to prevent it. The associate brethren are much to be blamed;
I never met with such narrow spirits. I do not forget you, or your
brethren, or the churches in your parts. The LORD be with you. He
is pleased to shew me more and more of my own heart, and day by day
refreshes my soul. My body is weak as usual; but JESUS is my strength.
Help me to praise him. Pray send a line to, reverend and dear Sir,

         Your most affectionate, though most unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXCI.

                  _To Mr. S――――, at New-Brunswick._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 2, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. S――――_,

LAST week I received your kind letter. Blessed be GOD, who hath
brought you out of darkness into his marvellous light. I hope the
Redeemer hath now shewn you his hands and his feet, and you can now
say, “My LORD and my GOD.” What have you to do now but to walk humbly
with your GOD, and daily to aspire after the whole mind that was in
JESUS? I find but few truly labouring after this. Who can say, “My
soul is athirst for GOD, yea even for the living GOD:” and yet to such
only is the promised blessedness, of being filled, given. As for my
own part, I am ashamed to think how unlike I am to my Saviour; I see
such beauty in him, that I long to be conformed to his divine image
and likeness. May you and I, dear Mr. _S――――_, never rest till we have
attained unto it; and the more we do attain, the more willing we shall
be to come, as poor sinners, to JESUS CHRIST; it is a blessed thing,
dear Sir, to be brought out of self. It will be continually creeping
in: happy they who have power over it. I do not wonder at your
being united with Mr. _J―――― C――――_: he is a dear soul, and one whom
the LORD delights to honour. Blessed be GOD, the work in our hands
every where increases. I am supported and encouraged, quickened and
comforted day by day. JESUS loves and blesses me. May he bless you and
yours more and more, and cause you to walk in the comforts of the Holy
Ghost. My tender love to all. I hope yet to see you once more in the
flesh. In the mean while I beg leave to subscribe myself, dear Sir,

    Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXCII.

                           _To Mr. W――――._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 2, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. W――――_,

I Thank you for your kind letter. It should have been answered sooner,
had an opportunity offered. I bless GOD for you, who carries on in
your soul the spiritual building. I doubt not but the top-stone will
yet be brought out, and the builders be made with shouting to cry,
“Grace! Grace!” I should think it was not of GOD, if the work was not
opposed.――What difficulties did _Nehemiah_ go through in building the
wall? But fear not, the LORD is with you. He built not for man, but
for the LORD. By his leave, I propose bringing a school-master and
mistress with me. When I shall embark, I know not. The calls here
are so loud and numerous, and so few labourers sent forth to act in a
popular way, that I think it my duty not to leave _England_ yet. GOD
is pleased to work by my ministry more and more. My soul is refreshed,
and my body strengthened and renewed day by day. In _Scotland_
there is a very great awakening; and also in _London_, _Bristol_,
_Wiltshire_, and _Gloucestershire_. But, notwithstanding all this, my
_American_ friends are by no means forgotten. I continually pray for
them. The LORD, in his due time, will send me to you. In the mean time,
be pleased to remember me in the tenderest manner to all that love the
glorious Redeemer. Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied upon them and
you: so prays, dear Mr. _W――――_,

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXCIII.

                _To Mr. James R――――, in Philadelphia._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 2, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. R――――_,

I Was glad to hear (though by another hand) of your safe arrival. May
your soul prosper, being rooted and grounded in love, and built upon
the rock of ages, the dear LORD JESUS. Blessed be GOD, the church is
in much greater peace than when you left _England_. There hath been
a very great awakening in several places. GOD hath brought order out
of confusion; and (as he always will) hath caused even our divisions,
though no thanks to us, to work for good. I hear you have had a
sifting time at _Philadelphia_. I never yet heard of a work of GOD,
but some such thing happened. This is my comfort, the government of
the church is upon the Redeemer’s shoulders; and therefore the gates
of hell shall never be able to prevail against it. I hope ere now
CHRIST has revealed himself in your heart, and given you the witness
of the Spirit. For he that believeth, hath the witness in himself. I
suppose you will be glad to hear, that the LORD hath, in a good degree,
delivered me from the embarrassments with which I was environed when
you embarked. GOD was then preparing me for further mercies. We must
be humbled before we are exalted. I suppose you have heard of my
marriage. The LORD hath given me a daughter of _Abraham_; she joins
in sending love to you and all, with, dear Mr. _R――――_,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXCIV.

                        _To Mr. G―――― T――――._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 5, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Brother_,

ON _Tuesday_ I received yours. I bless GOD for delivering brother
_R――――_ out of the hands of his enemies. I am persuaded he will
deliver your brother _William_ also. By your desertion and temptations,
I believe GOD is preparing you for a fresh work. I believe you would
be better, if you would always evangelize. I shall write to some
friends about Mr. _C――――_’s principles. I thank you for your kind
caution. My mistakes often humble me. Never did JESUS send out a
more weak and worthless wretch. I have not freedom now to continue
writing a journal as usual. I shall proceed, for the future, in a more
compendious way. Since I wrote the inclosed, we have seen a glorious
appearance of the Son of Man. O infinite condescension! The LORD is
with me. That he may be abundantly with you, and bless your labours
more and more, is the hearty prayer of, Reverend and dear Sir,

   Your most affectionate and loving, though most unworthy brother
                              in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCXCV.

                   _To Mr. B――――, at Philadelphia._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 5, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

I Was much rejoiced to receive a letter from your hands. Blessed be
GOD for carrying on the work, which, I hope, was begun in your heart
long ago! I trust you will never rest till you are possessed of the
whole mind which was in CHRIST JESUS. He is our pattern; and if we
have true grace in our hearts, we shall be continually labouring to
copy after our great exemplar. O the life of JESUS! How little of it
is to be seen in those that call themselves his followers. Humility,
meekness, love, peace, joy, goodness, faith, and the other blessed
fruits of the Spirit, whither are they fled? I fear most take up
with the shadow, instead of the substance. GOD forbid that I, or dear
Mr. _B――――_, should be of that unhappy number. Dear Sir, there is an
unspeakable fulness, unsearchable riches in CHRIST. Out of him we are
to receive grace for grace. Every grace that was in the Redeemer, is
to be transcribed and copied into our hearts. This is Christianity;
and without this, though we could dispute with the utmost clearness,
and talk like angels, of the doctrines of grace, it would profit us
nothing. To prevent the growth of this inward life, I am persuaded
satan introduces heresies in the church, hoping thereby to stir up
strife, envy, prejudice, and narrowness of spirit; and where these are,
there will be every evil work. To this end, _sinless perfection_ hath
been propagated in _England_, and _Antinomian principles_ suffered to
be spread among you. But, blessed be GOD, both in _England_, and with
you, I trust disputations and distractions are abated, and love and
unity once more are lifting up their heads. This, at present, is the
language of my heart:

               _Let us find out the ancient way,
                  Our wond’ring foes to move;
                And force the heathen world to say,
                  See how these Christians love._

“Love is of GOD; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in GOD.” I
am glad you are erecting a society to promote this love. Fear not
the smallness of your beginning. What is begun in the fear of GOD, he
will prosper. I believe them to be true followers of JESUS CHRIST; and
though we agree not in all things, yet I pray GOD to make us one in
heart. Now, dear Mr. _B――――_, what shall I say more. The blessed JESUS
has been superabundantly good to my soul since my arrival. I have
been carried, though through much weakness, as on eagles wings. In
_England_, _Wales_, and _Scotland_, GOD hath blessed my poor labours
more than ever. The calls to divers places, are loud and importunate;
and, as GOD has raised up many labourers among you, I think it my
duty to stay here some time longer, and to visit _Scotland_ once more.
However, my friends abroad are continually upon my heart. I pray GOD
for you night and day. May the LORD fill you with all his fulness! I
desire to be remembered to all mentioned in your’s, and to all that
love the LORD JESUS. I love you unfeignedly, and entreat you to write
again to, dear Sir,

              Your most affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXCVI.

                _To the Reverend Mr. C――――, at Bath._

                                         _Gloucester, Feb. 5, 1742._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

TO shew you how willing I am to comply with your request, and make
dear Mr. _C――――_ one of my close correspondents, I sit down this
evening to write an answer to your kind letter. What has been doing
lately, the transcript on the other side will shew you. Since the
writing of that, the blessed JESUS hath been wondrous kind. Yesterday
I preached three times, and visited a private society in the evening.
To-day I was enabled to preach three times, with great power. Here
is such an awakening in this country, as I never heard of, or saw in
these parts before: “The fields are white already unto harvest.” It is
pleasant to hear the people come and tell how GOD wrought upon them by
my unworthy ministry two years ago. The fruits of the Spirit are now
apparent in their lives and conversations. Letters from _Scotland_
bring blessed tidings, as also from _Philadelphia_. O the blessed
effects of field-preaching! O that I was humble, that I was thankful!
Help me, my dear friend, to entreat the Redeemer to make me as a
little, _a very little child_. The beginning of next week I hope to
be at _Bath_; but cannot tell exactly the day. I thank my friends for
their kind intention to meet me, but I had rather avoid it: the less
parade the better. Let us stand still, and we shall see the salvation
of GOD. He will not bless what doth not come from himself. May the
LORD make me an _Israelite_ indeed, in whom is no allowed guile! I
am glad dear Mr. _T――――_ is coming. My hearty love to him. O that our
meeting may be blessed, and all three of us be made a flame of fire!
Dear Mr. _C――――_, I love you unfeignedly. I wish, above all things,
your soul may prosper. Good night. My soul is filled with JESUS’s love.
I am going to pray for you and yours, being, dear Mr. _C――――_, without
dissimulation,

              Yours most affectionately in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCXCVII.

                 _To the Right Honourable the ――――._

                              _Thales, near Reading, Feb. 23, 1742._

AND does the dear ―――― know assuredly that JESUS hath died for him?
Sing, O heavens! Rejoice, O earth! I would join with angels and
archangels in singing “Glory to GOD on high.” Welcome, my ――――, into
the world of new creatures. You are infinitely more happy than those
who have lately been preferred, and kissed his Majesty’s hand. JESUS
hath holden out his golden scepter, and given you a patent for eternal
life. Methinks I hear your ―――― now saying, “I account the reproach of
CHRIST, of more value than all the riches of _Egypt_.”

               _Be gone, vain world, my heart resign,
                For I can be no longer thine;
                A nobler, a diviner guest,
                Hath took possession of my breast._

Well may your ―――― say, “you have been in a dream.” When GOD first
shewed me that I must be a new creature, I awaked as it were, into
a new world. I stood quite amazed. I was astonished to think, what a
deep sleep the world around me was in. Thought I, O that I was made
instrumental to some of them! The LORD heard my prayer. He has sent
me to awaken the dear man I am now writing to. Not unto me, O GOD,
not unto me, but to thy free grace and rich mercy be all the glory!
With your Lordship’s letter to-day, came several others from different
parts, all with glad tidings of great joy. O that I was humble and
thankful! Why me, LORD, why me? Surely I will join with your ―――― in
saying, not because I chose GOD, but GOD (O infinitely ♦condescending
majesty!) did chuse me. What shall we render to the glorious
_Emmanuel_? Methinks I hear your ―――― saying, “Behold, LORD,
henceforward I look upon myself as a steward, and not as a proprietor
of thy manifold gifts; I will live no longer to myself, but to
him that died for me.” Amen, LORD JESUS, amen and amen! Be pleased
to excuse the defects of this, being written upon the road. I am
now going to _London_. There has been a great awakening lately in
_Gloucestershire_. I rejoice to hear that the lady ―――― is so well
disposed. May a church be always in your ―――― house; and every one of
your ―――― family be made a living member of the houshold of faith! No
greater thing can be desired in your behalf by, my ――――,

               Your ―――― most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘conscending’ replaced with ‘condescending’


                          LETTER CCCXCVIII.

             _To the Right Honourable Lady M―――― H――――._

                             _Thales, (near Reading) Feb. 23, 1742._
  _Honoured Madam_,

I Am now upon the road to _London_. This morning your acceptable
letter came to hand. Though somewhat wearied, I would fain answer
it before I retire to rest. Blessed be GOD who causes your Ladyship
to be never less alone, than when alone. O Madam, what a comforter is
the Holy Ghost? What sweet company is JESUS CHRIST? What a privilege
is it to have fellowship with the great Three-One? A world lying in
wickedness knows nothing of it. Every thing yields comfort when the
blessed Spirit breathes upon it. Even this scribble, from the chief
of sinners, from one who is less than the least of all saints, shall
again refresh your soul, if JESUS speaks the word. Amazed am I, that
GOD should work by my hands. But JESUS is love. He yet delights to
honour me. I have lately seen the Redeemer riding in his strength,
and getting himself the victory in poor sinners hearts. Letters from
abroad inform me of the same. O that our glorious JESUS may set the
world in a flame of love! Hasten that time, O blessed JESUS: O let
thy kingdom come! I have heard from my dear Orphans to-day. They
have been reduced to straits; but the LORD hath stirred up a wealthy
friend or two to assist them. The everlasting GOD reward all their
benefactors! I find there has been a fresh awakening among them. I am
informed, that twelve negroes, belonging to a planter lately converted
at the Orphan-house, are savingly brought home to JESUS CHRIST. This
will rejoice your Ladyship’s heart. I am glad to hear that the work
goes on in _Scotland_. The LORD, I trust, will ripen your soul apace
for glory. He hath various ways of perfecting his saints. Methinks
I see your Ladyship sitting in your chair, and ravished with the
Redeemer’s beauty day by day. Sometimes you are as it were washing his
feet with your tears; at other times sitting by faith at his feet, and
hearing or reading his word. Sometimes your heart is too big to speak;
then again, out of the abundance of your heart, your mouth poureth
forth hallelujahs. Sometimes you are lost in wonder; at all times
longing to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST; for, when you hear him
say, “Rise up, my love, and come away,”

               _Your heart would fain outfly the wind,
                And leave all earthly loves behind._

This, I trust, is the life your Ladyship lives. This is life indeed.
They who live otherwise, are dead whilst they live. They call
for our compassion and prayers; for who hath made the difference?
Distinguishing grace! O the unsearchable riches of CHRIST? I could
speak of him for ever; but it grows late; nature calls for rest.

                 _O when shall I in endless day,
                  For ever chase dark sleep away;
                  And hymns with the celestial quire
                  Incessant sing, and never tire?_

Come, LORD JESUS, come quickly! The LORD be with your spirit, and
abundantly bless both you, Mr. _H――――_, and your child. Indeed I do
not forget your Ladyship; your last should not have remained so long
unanswered, but it came only to-day into the hands of, honoured Madam,

            Your Ladyship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER ♦CCCXCIX.

    ♦ ‘CCCXCXIX’ replaced with ‘CCCXCIX’
    
                 _To Mr. Thomas N――――, at New-York._

                                            _London, Feb. 26, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

I Have herewith sent you a parcel. Be pleased to read the letters,
and send them as directed. I received your kind letter, dated in
_December_, and thank you for all kindnesses shewn to the poor orphans.
The LORD JESUS will richly reward you. Before yours came, the LORD had
given me an enlarged heart, and unfeigned love and freedom to converse
with all his dear children, of whatever denomination. I talk freely
with the Messrs. _W――――_’s, though we widely differ in a certain
point. Most talk of a catholic spirit; but it is only till they have
brought people into the pale of their own church. This is downright
sectarianism, not catholicism. How can I act consistently, unless I
receive and love all the children of GOD, whom I esteem to be such, of
whatever denomination they may be? Why should we dispute when there is
no probability of convincing? I think this is not giving up the faith,
but fulfilling our LORD’s new command, “Love one another:” and our
love is but feigned, unless it produces proper effects. I am persuaded,
the more the love of GOD is shed abroad in our hearts, the more all
narrowness of spirit will subside and give way: besides, so far as
we are narrow spirited, we are uneasy. Prejudices, jealousies, and
suspicions make the soul miserable, so far as they are entertained.
But enough of this: my dear brother _N――――_ is of my mind. Only let me
give you one caution: Take heed that your getting acquainted with any
new set of Christians, does not lead you insensibly to despise others
of your old acquaintance. Watch, and deal very tenderly with all;
otherwise you will grow reserved and artful, and lose a simple, open,
guileless, _Israelitish_ spirit, before you are aware. There needs
a close adherence to the motions of the Holy Spirit, and a constant
watching over the corruptions of our own hearts, in order that we
may walk before GOD as very little children. O that I was a little
child indeed! JESUS can make me one. My dear brother, I thank you for
your kind invitation. GOD willing, I shall accept it, if ever I see
_New-York_. But I think Providence calls me once more to _Scotland_.
I have been lately plowing up some fallow ground, and now preach
twice every day. The LORD does indeed bless the word, and gives me to
rejoice in the felicity of his chosen. Be so kind now and then to drop
a line to my dear orphan-family. As opportunity offers, and the LORD
gives freedom, you shall hear from, dear brother _N――――_,

              Yours most affectionately in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                             LETTER CCCC.

                  _To Miss ―――― ――――, at Edinburgh._

                                            _London, Feb. 27, 1742._
  _Dear Miss_,

I Did not receive your letter till this night. Whilst I was reading it,
my heart grew warm with thankfulness to that GOD, who, I trust, by his
almighty Spirit hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous
light. In his light you now see light. Do you not, dear Miss _W――――_,
find what I said to be true, “That JESUS CHRIST is the fairest among
ten thousands.” Is he not altogether lovely? Henceforth you may well
say,

             _I bid this world of noise and shew,
              With all its flattering snares, adieu._

The greater advances you make in the divine life, the more you will
see what a dream you and the polite world have been in. And O the
distinguishing grace of GOD to you! Methinks I hear you calling on
angels and archangels to join in praising our common LORD. Well may
you say, “You are not henceforth your own:” No, dear Miss, let JESUS
have your whole heart. Let his blood, his wounds be continually
before you. GOD forbid that you should now glory, save in the cross
of CHRIST, by whom the world is crucified to you, and you unto the
world. Pity the poor christless creatures about you. Pray for them,
as the Holy Spirit gives you freedom. Tell them of the love of JESUS.
They need no other motive. This, backed with almighty power, must
break the most hardened heart. With much pleasure I reflect on the
blessed consolations I have been favoured with, whilst explaining
the scriptures to you and your honoured relations. O that not one may
remain unconverted! May JESUS look on them; then will they look on him
and be saved. Blessed be GOD for sending me to _Scotland_, if it was
only to bring you home. Ere long I hope to visit your country again;
and then, O that I may see you all meek, humble, heavenly-minded,
close followers of the bleeding Lamb! Thanks be to GOD, he hath
directed me to a wife, who was once gay, but now with you can sing,

                                 I.
               _Come, Saviour JESUS, from above,
                Assist me with thy heavenly grace;
                Withdraw my heart from worldly love,
                And for thyself prepare the place._

                                 II.
               _O let thy sacred presence fill,
                And set my longing spirit free;
                Which pants to have no other love,
                But night and day to feast on Thee._

                                III.
               _That path with humble speed I’ll seek,
                Wherein my Saviour’s footsteps shine;
                Nor will I hear, nor will I speak
                Of any other love but thine._

                                IV.
               _To Thee my ling’ring soul aspires;
                To Thee I offer all my vows;
                Keep me from vain and false desires,
                My GOD, my Saviour, and my spouse._

                                 V.
               _Wealth, honour, or whatever else
                This transitory world can give,
                Tempt as you will, my heart repels,
                To CHRIST alone resolved to live._

                                VI.
               _Thee I can love, and thee alone,
                With inward joy and holy bliss;
                To find thou tak’st me for thy own,
                O what a happiness is this!_

Dear Miss, whilst I am writing, the love of JESUS fills my soul. I
have been talking to night of his love to poor sinners. O that his
spirit may break afresh upon your soul when you are reading this! I
must now commend you to the Redeemer’s care. In the world you shall
have tribulation; be not afraid, JESUS hath overcome the world.――I
have many letters before me unread; but I could not help writing this
long one to you. Accept it as a token of unfeigned regard for the good
of your precious soul, and depend on the prayers of, dear Miss _W――――_,

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCI.

                     _To the Reverend Mr. C――――._

                                            _London, March 4, 1742._
  _My dear Friend and Brother_,

I Remember my promise. You are to be one of my close correspondents.
I am unworthy to write to any; but love, the love of JESUS will
constrain me frequently to write to you. I hope you are not offended,
because you did not see me in _Bath_ again. The glorious _Emmanuel_
pointed out my way hither. Since I came (O amazing goodness!) he has
been wonderfully kind to me, and to his people. I am much assisted
daily, in preaching to poor sinners the unsearchable riches of CHRIST.
Life and power fly all around, and the Redeemer is getting himself
the victory daily in many hearts. Letters from abroad give me glorious
accounts. In _New-England_, the work goes on amazingly. In _Scotland_,
the awakening is greater and greater. The spirit of GOD has been
striving among the little orphans in _Georgia_, and in _Carolina_ I
hear that twelve negroes belonging to a planter, converted at the
Orphan-house, are savingly brought home to JESUS CHRIST. Indeed the
LORD is about to do great things. “Blessed are the eyes that see the
things which we see; blessed are the ears that hear the things that we
hear;” blessed are those that the LORD employs as his own children, to
bring about his great designs. O that my dear Mr. _C――――_ may be made
a flaming fire, and a spiritual father to thousands! Dear Mr. _T――――_,
who was so kind as to come and see me last night, I trust is coming on.
I hope both you and him will experience a solid establishment in the
grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. There is no rest here, no true solid
lasting rest, till we come to this. Our hearts are deceitful above
all things. We seek rest in outward things. We change our places,
circumstances, and stations;――but if JESUS loves us, he will put a
thorn in the place where we would fain nestle. A soul that has had
some awakenings, and been wandring from CHRIST, is like _Noah_’s dove
which could find no rest for the sole of its foot, till it came back
to the ark again. This ark is CHRIST, and when we are safely locked
in there, and the soul hath received an abiding witness, then out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. This is the reason why
JESUS bid his disciples to wait for the promise of the Father. Filled
with this, the woman of _Samaria_ could not but call on others to come
and see. And were we but animated, led and influenced by this spirit,
what a blessed union would there be among all the churches of JESUS
CHRIST? It is a want of more of this, that now at present disunites
us. I despair therefore of a greater union, till a greater measure
of the spirit be poured from on high. Hence, therefore, I am resolved
simply to preach the gospel of CHRIST, and leave others to quarrel
by and with themselves. To contend, where there is no probability
of convincing, only feeds and adds fuel to an unhallow’d fire,
which a misguided zeal kindles in the heart. Love, forbearance,
long-suffering, and frequent prayer to your dear LORD JESUS, is the
best way to extinguish and put it out. O love, true, simple, christian,
undissembled love, whither art thou fled! The language of my heart
is,――But whither am I going? You see, my friend, how freely I write.
The blessed JESUS warms and fills me, whilst I am writing. I know,
though I am unworthy, you will send me a line in return. Methinks
I could wash your feet. Methinks, I long to see your shackles drop
off, and your soul free for the uninterrupted service of the best of
masters. Faith in his bloody wounds is the only means. LORD, evermore
give my dear friend and his wife living faith, which may purify their
hearts, enable them to overcome the world, and will work by love! The
LORD make you both as little children before him! This is the prayer
of, dear Mr. _C――――_,

                   Yours affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCII.

                           _To Mr. A――――._

                                            _London, March 4, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. A――――_,

I Received your comfortable letter concerning the dear lambs at
_Heriot_’s hospital. I pray GOD give you grace to feed them, that they
may grow in grace as they grow in years, and make perpetual advances
in the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST. Be pleased to salute them from
me, in the kindest manner. Entreat them, O exhort them to remember
their Creator in the days of their youth, and to keep close by his
wounded side. Tell them, dear Sir, from time to time, of the power and
efficacy of his all-atoning blood: it purifies the heart, overcomes
the world, and fills the believer with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Watch over their dear souls day by day, and wait closely upon
the LORD yourself, that you may be taught of him to feed his lambs.
It is a work of the utmost importance. No less than infinite wisdom
can be sufficient for you; but if any man lack wisdom, let him ask
it from above; GOD giveth liberally to the lovers of his dear Son,
and upbraideth not. Dear Sir, GOD is love. He hath loved me, and
is pleased to work by me more and more. At home, and abroad, JESUS
CHRIST rides on gloriously. I hope, at my return to _Scotland_, to
see greater things than ever. When it shall be, I know not yet. GOD’s
people must pray me to them. With difficulty I get time to write this.
I once more salute you and the dear lambs, and am, dear Sir,

              Your most affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCIII.

                    _To Mr. J―――― K――――, at Exon._

                                            _London, March 6, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Now snatch a few moments to answer your kind letter. As yet, I have
no intimation from providence in respect to coming into your parts.
The cloud at present doth not seem to move that way. So many places
want supplies, that I could wish I had a thousand lives and tongues.
JESUS CHRIST should have them all. Only I am astonished, that the LORD
of the harvest should send out such a worthless labourer, or rather
loiterer as I am. But his grace is free, like himself infinite;
“For to me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace
given, that I should preach to poor sinners the unsearchable riches
of CHRIST.” Blessed be GOD, I do not preach in vain. The accounts
from _New-England_, _Scotland_, and _Carolina_, are surprizing. In
_London_, the word of the LORD runs and is glorified. Every day we see
the Redeemer’s stately steps. I have not time, dear Sir, to tell you
what great things our great master is doing for his people, and yet I
believe we shall see greater things than these. From _Georgia_ also,
I have great accounts. The spirit of the LORD hath been breathing upon
the orphans. I thank you, dear Sir, for your intended benefaction,
and kind invitation. If ever our dear LORD calls me your way, I shall
accept it: though I am utterly unworthy to come under any one’s roof,
but more especially that JESUS should come under the roof of the house
of my soul.――But JESUS is love. That his love may be abundantly shed
abroad in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, is the hearty prayer of, dear
Sir,

          Your most affectionate friend and servant unknown,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCIV.

                 _To Mr. G―――― H――――, in Gloucester._

                                          _London, March, 12, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. H――――_,

BY no means leave off reading to the society. It is not taking too
much upon you, or going out of your depth. The cause of your so much
as thinking to decline, is not good. The more unworthy you are, the
more glory will you give to a glorious Redeemer: the greater sinner
you are, the more feelingly will you read of, and recommend the
glorious Ransom paid for sinners. Go on, my dear man; venture boldly
to the throne of grace; fear not.――GOD will heal our backslidings;
he loves us freely. JESUS hath been my glorious Saviour. I would
have mentioned this affair of the society in my last, but I was then
ignorant of it.――My dear wife has written to dear Mrs. _H――――_. How
does the dear woman as to spirituals? I do not despair of seeing you
both good christians. JESUS is almighty. Go to him just as you are.
The LORD be with you both! I suppose you have seen the letter sent
to dear M. _C――――_ by brother _S――――_. My tender love to him, and all
that love the blessed _Emmanuel_. I have seen Mr. _J――――_. The LORD is
wonderfully good to me. Pray send a line to, dear Sir,

                Yours affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCV.

                           _To Miss R――――._

                                           _London, March 18, 1742._
  _Dear Miss_,

I Am yet of opinion, there is mercy and love laid up for you in the
heart of the blessed JESUS. You look backward, instead of forward. You
look into yourself, instead of looking up to Him, who is mighty and
willing to save. O that you may have strength to go to him just as you
are! You would then be delivered from your bondage. The case of the
poor _Syrophœnician_ woman may give you comfort. How did the Lamb of
GOD seem as it were to turn lion? How did he seem to turn a deaf ear
to her complaints? And yet heard and loved her all the while. Why may
not you believe? He will yet say to you, “Be it unto you even as thou
wilt.” I fear some tell you, that it is well to doubt. Indeed they
are mistaken. Dear Miss, expect great things from JESUS CHRIST. “He
is able to do abundantly for you above what you can ask or think.” His
name, his nature is Love. Fear not; be not faithless, but believing.
Wait, and you shall yet see the salvation of GOD. In JESUS there is
plenteous redemption. That you may feel the full power of his blood,
prays, dear Miss,

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCVI.

                     _To Mr. W――――, in Bristol._

                                            _London, April 6, 1742._
  _My dear, yea very dear Brother_,

YOU must needs think, that your kind letter gave me no small pleasure.
Glory be to GOD for that rich love wherewith he hath loved you! Surely
JESUS CHRIST will be now exceeding precious to your dear soul. What
does he now require of you, but to walk humbly, closely, and with a
child-like simplicity before him? He hath followed you, as well as
prevented you with his mercies, and would suffer nothing to take you
out of his hands. Satan hath desired you, satan has sifted you as
wheat; but JESUS, that friend of sinners, hath prayed for you, and
therefore your faith hath not failed. The LORD hath looked upon my
dear _Samuel_. Methinks I see him weeping tears of love, and saying,
“_Speak_, LORD, _thy servant heareth_ now.”

I doubt not but many will reproach you for your past backsliding, and
question your future stability. Let all serve to humble you in the
dust, and drive you to the loving JESUS for refuge. “In him,” surely
shall my dear friend say, “I have righteousness and strength.” Look up
to him, and you shall be delivered from, nay, made more than conqueror
over every temptation. He will fight your battles for you, and crown
you when you have done. Dear Mr. _W――――_, the love of JESUS now
swallows up my soul. I see him more and more lovely every day. In
JESUS there is plenteous redemption. He came, that we might have life,
nay that we might have it more abundantly. O what a blessing is it to
be redeemed from a vain conversation, and from this present evil world.
O that every poor sinner felt it! Then would his children agree in
one, and divisions would be at an end. Blessed be our LORD, there is
a greater prospect of union than ever. It is what my soul longs after,
and labours for. It is a great pity that poor pilgrims should fall
out in their way to heaven; but this will be, till we get more of
the divine spirit. Pray we therefore for a great effusion of the
Holy Ghost. Blessed be GOD, we feel the Holy Ghost daily in our
congregations. It surprizes me to see what a company of settled, solid
christians are amongst us. The work goes on daily. This morning, how
did JESUS pierce and melt poor sinners hearts? Amazing accounts are
brought from abroad.――Fresh awakenings in many places at home. Does
not your soul long to tell sinners, JESUS is Love. I am glad to hear
you are so active. Go on in the strength of the triumphing Lamb. My
heart is warm. Welcome home again, my dear friend, welcome to JESUS
your LORD and your GOD. Pray write often, dear Mr. _W――――_, to

          Your most affectionate friend, brother and servant
                     in the glorious _Emmanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCVII.

                    _To Mr. O――――, in Leominster._

                                            _London, April 6, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

YOUR letter gave me uncommon pleasure, and confirm’d me more in
the opinion, that where our LORD gives a will, he will also give an
opportunity of glorifying his great and most adorable name. Indeed,
I believe there is such a work begun, as neither we nor our fathers
have heard of. The beginnings are amazing; how unspeakably glorious
will the end be! From _New-England_, fresh and surprizing glad tidings
are sent; the LORD takes poor sinners there by hundreds, I may say by
thousands. In _Scotland_, the fruits of my poor labours are abiding
and apparent. In _Wales_, I hear the word of the LORD runs and is
glorified, as also in many places in _England_. In _London_, our
Saviour is doing great things daily; we have many dear growing
children among us, who can say, “Our fellowship is with the Father and
the Son.” We scarce know what it is to have a meeting without tears.
Our LORD always meets with us. My dear brother, I rejoice to hear that
you are helped in your work. Let this encourage you; go on, go on; the
more we do, the more we may do for JESUS. I sleep and eat but little,
and am constantly employed from morning till midnight, and yet I walk
and am not weary, I run and am not faint. My strength is daily renewed.
My bow abides in strength, and my hands are upholden by the arms of
the mighty GOD of Jacob. O free grace! It fires my soul, and makes me
long to do something more for JESUS. It is true indeed, I want to go
home; but here are so many souls ready to perish for lack of knowledge,
that I am willing to tarry below, as long as my master hath work for
me to do.――When I shall come your way, I cannot determine.――All I say
is, I will come when the LORD gives me leave. At present my call is in
_London_, where I propose staying for some time. My wife came up last
_Saturday_, and joins with me in wishing you all manner of success. I
am, my dear brother,

        Yours most affectionately in our glorious _Emmanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCVIII.

              _To Mr. J―――― C――――, in Gloucestershire._

                                            _London, April 8, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. J―――― C――――_,

YOURS came to hand last night. I rejoice to hear that the LORD
is with you, and that he was pleased to bless my poor labours in
_Gloucestershire_. I would have you to dispute as little as possible.
Awakened souls should be told to look continually to the LORD JESUS.
The more you are acquainted with CHRIST, and the more deeply you drink
into his spirit, the more solid you will grow. Fear not because of
your present trials; “the LORD is thy GOD; he will never leave thee
nor forsake thee.” Cast all your care upon him, he careth for you.
Your wife’s illness shall work for good. The things I promised, are
provided and shall be sent speedily. Brother _H――――_ will be with
you, GOD willing, next week; I pray GOD that his coming may be in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of peace! Our LORD is with us
much here. I preach twice daily. Our society grows. My master fills
me with his presence, and continually meets with us. My tender love
awaits all the society. Be strong in the LORD, and in the power of his
might. Seek after a nearer conformity to the blessed JESUS. Grow in
grace; and as you are enabled, dear _John_, pray for

      Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCIX.

                 _To Captain G――――, in Philadelphia._

                                           _London, April 22, 1742._
  _Dear Brother G――――_,

I Hope this will find you very happy in the love of CHRIST. I was glad
to hear you had so good a time, before our friends left you. I wish
you no less, than that you may be filled with all the fulness of
GOD. We have had a glorious _Easter_, or rather a _Pentecost_. JESUS
CHRIST is risen indeed. I have been preaching in _Moorfields_, and our
Saviour carries all before us. Nought can resist his conquering blood.
It would have delighted you, to have seen the poor sinners flock from
the booths, to see JESUS lifted up on the pole of the gospel. I have
received many tickets from young apprentices, &c. &c. Our society
goes on wonderfully well. Every day we hear of fresh conquests. GOD’s
children are expecting very great things. I believe they will not be
disappointed of their hope. But I am in haste. Your wife was well the
last time I saw her. Brother _S――――_ and his wife have been to see
her.――My dear wife and brother _S――――_ kindly salute you, and all
that love our glorious _Emmanuel_. Pray write a line to, dear brother
_G――――_,

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCX.

              _To the Reverend Mr. J――――, in Yorkshire._

                                           _London, April 22, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Thank you and your wife for your kind benefaction. Our Saviour, I
believe, will take it kindly at your hands. I rejoice that the work
of our common master is carried on in _Yorkshire_. We see greater
things than ever at _London_. The awakening is quite fresh. I never
was strengthened more. Every day, poor sinners are brought home to
JESUS CHRIST. Our people are filled as with new wine; it seems to be a
_Pentecost_. I have preached six or seven times in _Moorfields_, these
holidays. It would rejoice you to see the people flock from satan’s
booths to hear the gospel of the Son of GOD. The people seem to have
such a spirit of supplication poured out upon them, that I believe
we shall see great things. I am often weak in body, but, as my work
requires, I am proportionably strengthened in the inner man. Was
there ever such a sinner as I am? Was there ever such a Saviour as
my Saviour?

               _Low at thy feet, O JESUS, let me lie,
                And love and praise to all eternity._

I salute all that love the LORD JESUS in sincerity, and am, dear
brother _J――――_,

              Yours most affectionately in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCXI.

                           _To Mr. L――――._

                                             _London, May 11, 1742._

WITH this, I send you a few out of the many notes I have received from
persons, who were convicted, converted, or comforted in _Moorfields_,
during the late holidays. For many weeks, I found my heart much
pressed to determine to venture to preach there at this season, when,
if ever, satan’s children keep up their annual rendezvous. I must
inform you, that _Moorfields_ is a large spacious place, given, as
I have been told, by one _Madam Moore_, on purpose for all sorts of
people to divert themselves in. For many years past, from one end
to the other, booths of all kinds have been erected, for mountebanks,
players, puppet shows, and such like. With a heart bleeding with
compassion for so many thousands led captive by the devil at his will,
on _Whit-Monday_, at six o’clock in the morning, attended by a large
congregation of praying people, I ventured to lift up a standard
amongst them in the name of JESUS of _Nazareth_. Perhaps there were
about ten thousand in waiting, not for me, but for satan’s instruments
to amuse them.――Glad was I to find, that I had for once as it were got
the start of the devil. I mounted my field pulpit, almost all flocked
immediately around it. I preached on these words, “As _Moses_ lifted
up the serpent in the wilderness, so shall the son of man be lifted
up, &c.” They gazed, they listened, they wept; and I believe that many
felt themselves stung with deep conviction for their past sins. All
was hushed and solemn. Being thus encouraged, I ventured out again
at noon; but what a scene! The fields, the whole fields seemed, in a
bad sense of the word, all white, ready not for the Redeemer’s, but
Beelzebub’s harvest. All his agents were in full motion, drummers,
trumpeters, merry andrews, masters of puppet shows, exhibiters of wild
beasts, players, &c. &c. all busy in entertaining their respective
auditories. I suppose there could not be less than twenty or thirty
thousand people. My pulpit was fixed on the opposite side, and
immediately, to their great mortification, they found the number of
their attendants sadly lessened. Judging that like saint _Paul_, I
should now be called as it were to fight with beasts at _Ephesus_, I
preached from these words: “Great is _Diana_ of the _Ephesians_.” You
may easily guess, that there was some noise among
the craftsmen, and that I was honoured with having a few stones, dirt,
rotten eggs, and pieces of dead cats thrown at me, whilst engaged
in calling them from their favourite but lying vanities. My soul was
indeed among lions; but far the greatest part of my congregation,
which was very large, seemed for a while to be turned into lambs. This
encouraged me to give notice, that I would preach again at six o’clock
in the evening. I came, I saw, but what――thousands and thousands more
than before if possible, still more deeply engaged in their unhappy
diversions; but some thousands amongst them waiting as earnestly
to hear the gospel. This satan could not brook. One of his choicest
servants was exhibiting, trumpeting on a large stage; but as soon as
the people saw me in my black robes and my pulpit, I think all to a
man left him and ran to me. For a while I was enabled to lift up my
voice like a trumpet, and many heard the joyful sound. GOD’s people
kept praying, and the enemy’s agents made a kind of a roaring at some
distance from our camp. At length they approached nearer, and the
merry andrew, (attended by others, who complained that they had taken
many pounds less that day on account of my preaching) got upon a man’s
shoulders, and
advancing near the pulpit attempted to slash me with a long heavy whip
several times, but always with the violence of his motion tumbled down.
Soon afterwards, they got a recruiting serjeant with his drum, &c. to
pass through the congregation. I gave the word of command, and ordered
that way might be made for the king’s officer. The ranks opened, while
all march’d quietly through, and then closed again. Finding those
efforts to fail, a large body quite on the opposite side assembled
together, and having got a large pole for their standard, advanced
towards us with steady and formidable steps, till they came very near
the skirts of our hearing, praying, and almost undaunted congregation.
I saw, gave warning, and prayed to the captain of our salvation for
present support and deliverance. He heard and answered; for just as
they approached us with looks full of resentment, I know not by what
accident, they quarrelled among themselves, threw down their staff
and went their way, leaving however many of their company behind, who
before we had done, I trust were brought over to join the besieged
party. I think I continued in praying preaching and singing, (for the
noise was too great at times to preach) about three hours. We then
retired to the tabernacle, with my pockets full of notes from persons
brought under concern, and read them amidst the praises and spiritual
acclamations of thousands, who joined with the holy angels in
rejoicing that so many sinners were snatched, in such an unexpected,
unlikely place and manner, out of the very jaws of the devil. This
was the beginning of the tabernacle society.――Three hundred and fifty
awakened souls were received in one day, and I believe the number of
notes exceeded a thousand; but I must have done, believing you want to
retire to join in mutual praise and thanksgiving to GOD and the Lamb,
with

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXII.

                            _To the same._

                                             _London, May 15, 1742._
  _My dear Friend_,

FRESH matter of praise; bless ye the LORD, for he hath triumphed
gloriously. The battle that was begun on _Monday_, was not quite over
till _Wednesday_ evening, though the scene of action was a little
shifted. Being strongly invited, and a pulpit being prepared for me by
an honest quaker, a coal merchant, I ventured on _Tuesday_ evening to
preach at _Mary le bon fields_, a place almost as much frequented by
boxers, gamesters, and such like, as _Moor-fields_. A vast concourse
was assembled together, and as soon as I got into the field pulpit,
their countenance bespoke the enmity of their hearts against the
preacher. I opened with these words――“I am not ashamed of the gospel
of CHRIST, for it is the power of GOD unto salvation to every one that
believeth.” I preached in great jeopardy; for the pulpit being high,
and the supports not well fixed in the ground, it tottered every time
I moved, and numbers of enemies strove to push my friends against the
supporters, in order to throw me down. But the Redeemer stayed my soul
on himself, therefore I was not much moved, unless with compassion for
those to whom I was delivering my master’s message, which I had reason
to think, by the strong impressions that were made, was welcome to
many. But satan did not like thus to be attacked in his strong-holds,
and I narrowly escaped with my life: for as I was passing from the
pulpit to the coach, I felt my wig and hat to be almost off. I turned
about, and observed a sword just touching my temples. A young rake,
as I afterwards found, was determined to stab me, but a gentleman,
seeing the sword thrusting near me, struck it up with his cane, and
so the destined victim providentially escaped. Such an attempt excited
abhorrence; the enraged multitude soon seized him, and had it not been
for one of my friends, who received him into his house, he must have
undergone a severe discipline. The next day, I renewed my attack in
_Moor-fields_; but would you think it? after they found that pelting,
noise, and threatnings would not do, one of the _merry Andrews_ got up
into a tree very near the pulpit, and shamefully exposed his nakedness
before all the people. Such a beastly action quite abashed the serious
part of my auditory; whilst hundreds of another stamp, instead of
rising up to pull down the unhappy wretch, expressed their approbation
by repeated laughs. I must own at first it gave me a shock; I thought
satan had now almost outdone himself; but recovering my spirits, I
appealed to all, since now they had such a spectacle before them,
whether I had wronged human nature in saying, after pious _Bishop
Hall_, “that man, when left to himself, is half a devil and half a
beast;” or as the great Mr. _Law_ expressed himself, “a motley mixture
of the beast and devil.”――Silence and attention being thus gained, I
concluded with a warm exhortation, and closed our festival enterprizes,
in reading fresh notes that were put up, praising and blessing GOD
amidst thousands at the tabernacle, for what he had done for precious
souls, and on account of the deliverances he had wrought out for me
and his people. I could enlarge; but being about to embark in the
_Mary and Ann_, for _Scotland_, I must hasten to subscribe myself,

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._

_P. S._ I cannot help adding, that several little boys and girls who
were fond of sitting round me on the pulpit, while I preached, and
handing to me peoples notes, though they were often pelted with eggs,
dirt, &c. thrown at me, never once gave way: but on the contrary,
every time I was struck, turned up their little weeping eyes, and
seemed to wish they could receive the blows for me. GOD make them in
their growing years great and living martyrs for him, who out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings perfects praise!


                           LETTER CCCCXIII.

             _To the Rev. Mr. M――――, in the Isle of Man._

       _On board the Mary and Ann, bound to Scotland, May 26, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Received your letter on _Saturday_ last, and felt great concern on
my soul, while perusing it. One thing especially pleased me; I found
by the contents, that a report I had lately heard concerning you was
false; for I had heard, that the bishop seeing your zeal, and finding
his opposition had inflamed, at last had ordered the clergy to open
the church doors for you, and that now you had done with appearing
openly in the defence of the glorious Gospel. Blessed be GOD this is
not true! Though I find, both you and your people have been greatly
discouraged. I see no way of extricating yourself, but by acting up to
the dictates of your own conscience, and leaving the consequences to
the great head and king of the church. You find, dear Sir, a sensible
withdrawing of the spirit ever since you gave way. It would not have
been so, had you obeyed GOD rather than man. Up then, and be doing,
and the LORD will be yet with you. If you cannot preach freely in the
_Isle of Man_, go whithersoever the LORD shall be pleased to lead you.
Our commission is very extensive: “Go into all the world, and preach
the gospel to every creature.” We want labourers much in _England_.
If our ascended Saviour hath given you popular gifts, and freedom and
authority in speaking without notes, you need not fear. He will assist
you from time to time, and make you a blessing to many souls. Your
being a minister of the established church, will be an advantage, and
your age also will give you yet more authority; but an unction from
the Holy One of _Israel_ is the best qualification; I would therefore,
dear Sir (if such a one as I, am capable of advising) by all means
persuade you to humble yourself before the great bishop of your soul,
and ask him again and again what he would have you to do? I am apt to
think, he will not restore to you the comforts of the Holy Ghost, or
stablish you with his free spirit, ’till you give up yourself simply
to follow the dictates of his providence and spirit. Then let men or
devils say or do their worst. How can we know GOD’s power unless we
try it? Not that I would have you, dear friend, do any thing rashly.
No, “he that believeth doth not make haste.” Wait upon the LORD,
and he will certainly shew you what he would have you to do. I wonder
not that your brother’s love is grown cold. It is hard for one in his
station, unless he be thoroughly inured to contempt, and will give GOD
leave to act in his own way, to withstand a whole body of lukewarm,
prejudiced, envious, malignant clergy. These, have always been the
greatest opposers of true vital religion. These, were our Saviour’s
most bitter enemies. These, will be ours also, if we come forth in
his spirit, and preach by his power. But blessed be GOD, I can say
by happy experience, our glorious _Emmanuel_ will make us more than
conquerors over them all. He hath continually fought my battles for me,
and I am persuaded will do so to the end. Of late, I have seen more of
his power and goodness than ever, and I trust we shall yet see greater
things than these. I am now once more going to _Scotland_, and purpose
(GOD willing) the latter end of the year to embark for _America_. Pray
let me hear from you, and if possible let me have a personal interview.
I hope this will reach you. In the next, be pleased to tell me how
to direct, for I have forgotten. The LORD be with you. I wish you
abundant prosperity in the name of the exalted Redeemer, and am

              Your affectionate brother and servant, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXIV.

                _To Mr. S―――― M――――, in Gainsborough._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 26, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

YOUR letter dated _May 5th_ was very agreeable to me. I think it
savoured of a true Israelitish spirit, and therefore I find freedom
to send you a plain and simple answer. Who _J―――― H――――_ is, I cannot
tell. If he was converted by my unworthy ministry, or others by his
means, let our dear JESUS have all the glory. I shall know who they
are, at the great day. Mr. _P――――_ I know very well. I believe he is
a good man, but am not enough acquainted with his proceedings, either
wholly to commend or condemn them. Whether he preaches in public, or
converses only in a private manner, I know not. This one thing I know,
if he be sent of GOD, I wish him prosperity. The answer which our LORD
gave to those who forbad such as were casting out devils in his name,
because they followed not with them, makes me particularly cautious,
how I interrupt any one that seems to speak of JESUS with sincerity of
heart. As for his speaking so little against the church of England, I
cannot discommend him for that. I find it best to talk only of JESUS’s
blood, and the power of his Redemption, and not dwell much on outward
things or outward worship. When the woman of _Samaria_ asked our
LORD, “where men ought to worship,” he diverted the discourse from the
outward to the inward worship. “The worship of the Father in spirit
and in truth.” Some things may be wrong in the church of _England_,
and in this mixed state we must never expect to see a perfect church,
or a perfect man. It is therefore my constant aim to agree with all
the children of GOD, as far as I can, and not to quarrel though we
differ in some points. In civil society, one family does not differ
with another, because it hath not the same orders in every respect.
Would to GOD we observed the same rule in spirituals. The world falls
out enough with us; it is pity we should fall out among ourselves. My
brother, I have written to you out of the fulness of my heart; whether
I shall see your face in the flesh, I know not. At present, my call
is to _Scotland_.――If the cloud should move towards _Lincolnshire_,
my answer is, “LORD, lo I come!” I am quite confounded when I
think that such a wretch as I should ever be employed in preaching
the everlasting gospel. I often fall down under a sense of GOD’s
distinguishing mercy, and with awful adoration am frequently made to
cry out, “Why me, LORD; why me?” O my brother, help me to praise the
Lamb of GOD, that taketh away the sins of the world. A wonderful work
is carried on both at home and abroad. I shall be glad to hear from
you again. Be pleased to direct as before. I am, in the bowels of
JESUS CHRIST,

            Your affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCXV.

                   _To Mr. J―――― B――――, in London._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 27, 1742._
  _My dear Brother B――――_,

YOUR letter was sweet to my heart. Business prevented my answering it
on shore. Our Saviour is pleased at this time to give me leisure and
freedom. I will now endeavour to answer it on board. I need not tell
you, I love you. GOD has often bore witness to our fellowship, by
giving us his presence, and filling us as with new wine. What has
happened of late to disunite, will in the end, I am persuaded, only
promote a closer union. “Out of the eater will come forth meat, and
out of the strong will come forth sweetness.” Blessed be our Saviour’s
free grace! I feel my heart more and more enlarged towards, and more
and more disposed to love and honour all denominations of believers,
than ever I experienced before. In all societies of christians under
heaven, there must necessarily be persons of a different standing in
the school of CHRIST. Those who are not solidly established in the
love of GOD, will fall too much in love with the outward form of their
particular church, be it what it will. But as the love of GOD gets
the ascendency, the more they will be like him and his holy angels,
and consequently rejoice when souls are brought to JESUS, whatever
instruments may be made use of for that purpose. If therefore some
that you and I know, are too confined (as I believe is too much the
case); if they do not preach more frequently, and abound more in good
works, I think it is for want of having their hearts more inflamed
with the love of GOD, and their graces kept in more constant exercise.
To stir up the gift of GOD that is in us, is an apostolical injunction;
and if we do not keep upon our watch we shall fall into a false
stillness. Nature loves ease; and as a blind zeal often prompts us to
speak too much, so tepidity and lukewarmness often cause us to speak
too little. Divine wisdom alone, is profitable to direct; and I would
be very cautious how I speak, least I should take too much upon me. I
love those you mention, from my soul; and all I can say is, “LORD, do
thou lead and guide both them and us.” We are blind helpless creatures.
I wish there was more confidence between us all; but I see that none
but the spirit of GOD can outwardly unite us, and therefore I have now
given it up into the Redeemer’s hand. Only this I pray, that I may be
one of the first and not the last in bringing back the king. If I have
at any time set improper bounds to the spirit of GOD, or grieved it
in his children, I desire to be very low, and to be broken hearted
for it. I am sure it hath not been done willingly. I must own, I have
sometimes opposed you, because I think you have made, and are yet
making, too much haste. You seem to be like-minded with those, who in
our Saviour’s time thought that the kingdom of GOD would then come:
but you know how our LORD checked them for it, and told them, “it was
not for them to know the particular times and seasons of his coming to
set up his kingdom.” I believe with you, that our glorious _Emmanuel_
is about to do great things. But how, when, and where, I leave to his
divine, sovereign disposal. I desire strictly to mind the particular
plan assigned me; at the same time to look about, and see what others
the wonderful counsellor is pleased to employ in other districts: and
though they may differ from me in some points, I wish them abundant
prosperity in the name of our common LORD. I am of your mind with
respect to the church of _England_. This, this is the constant,
abiding, intense language of my heart; “LORD JESUS, let thy kingdom
come.” You see, my dear brother, how fully I write to you. It is
because I love you. O that we may be taught to bear one another’s
burdens, and so fulfil the law of CHRIST! May the LORD keep us all
from falling out in our way to heaven. Amen and amen! You and yours
will join heartily in the same petition, with

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXVI.

               _To the Rev. Mr. O――――, at Leominster._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 27, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Have not till now had time to answer your kind letter. I rejoice
abundantly in the use our dear LORD is beginning to make of you. May
he use and bless you ever more and more. Our LORD loves to encourage
faith. They that trust in him, shall find now as well as formerly,
that “it shall be given them in that hour what they shall speak.”
This I find true by happy experience, and am persuaded shall prove the
truth of it more and more. Since my last, the captain of our salvation
has carried me on to fresh conquest, and caused his people to rejoice
exceedingly in his great salvation. Our society is in great order. If
the LORD gives us a true catholic spirit, free from a party sectarian
zeal, we shall do well. I am sorry to hear that there is so much
narrowness among some of the brethren in _Wales_. Brother _H――――_
complains sadly of it. I hope dear Mr. _O――――_ will be kept free, and
not fall into disputing about _Baptism_ or other non-essentials; for I
am persuaded, unless we all are content to preach CHRIST, and to keep
off from disputable things, wherein we differ, GOD will not bless us
long. If we act otherwise, however we may talk of a catholic spirit,
we shall only be bringing people over to our own party, and there
fetter them. I pray the LORD to keep dear Mr. _O――――_ and me from such
a spirit. Dear Sir, may the LORD be with you! Remember us poor but
willing pilgrims, especially him who is less than the least of all,
but

           Your affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXVII.

             _To the Rev. Mr. J―――― S――――, at Stockport._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 29, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Received your letter some time ago, but through multiplicity of
business could not possibly answer it on shore. I do not remember
seeing you at _London_; but if you love the Redeemer in sincerity,
and preach the gospel in the demonstration of the spirit and with
power, I wish you all possible success in the name of the LORD. As
for coming into your parts, it is intirely uncertain. My present call
is to _Scotland_. How my Master will dispose of me hereafter, I know
not. I simply desire to go whither he shall be pleased to call me.
I am amazed that he should call me any where, or employ me as his
ambassador to beseech poor sinners to be reconciled to GOD. But what
shall we say? I can only fall down at the feet of the Lamb, and cry,
Grace! grace! Of late the LORD hath done greater things for me, and
his church, than ever; and yet greater things I am persuaded he is
about to bring to pass. Dear Sir, help me at the throne of grace, and
as you seem to have a thirst for the Redeemer’s glory, recommend me to
the prayers of GOD’s people, being the chief of sinners, but, for the
Redeemer’s sake,

         Your most affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXVIII.

                  _To the Rev. Mr. D――――, in Essex._

                                                     _May 29, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

YOUR letter lies by me, yet unanswered; the contents however have not
been forgotten before the LORD. Surely the days of your pilgrimage
will ere long be ended, and the star which you once saw, appear to
you again, and cause you to rejoice with exceeding great joy. I think
there is something very extraordinary in the LORD’s dealing with
you. I can only resolve it into the divine sovereignty, and say,
“even so, Father, for so it seemeth good in thy sight.” This is often
the language of my heart, with respect to GOD’s dealing with my own
soul. Many things our Saviour does to me, which I know not now. It is
sufficient that I shall know hereafter, and that I know thus far even
now, “that all things are working together for good.” Dear Mr. _D――――_,
indeed I love and pray for you. Our Saviour, I trust, will yet set
your feet in a large room, and enable you to run the way of his
commandments;

  _Thro’ winds, and clouds, and storms, he’ll gently clear the way;
   Wait then his time, so shall this night soon end in joyous day._

My tender love await the flock at _D――――m_; I pray for them and you.
Our Saviour hath done great things of late in _London_. I believe he
will yet do more in _Scotland_. O my brother, forget not to pray for
the chief of sinners.

         Your truly affectionate friend, brother and servant
                           in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXIX.

                  _To the Rev. Mr. C――――, at Bath._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 29, 1742._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

NOT want of love, but excess of business prevented my answering your
kind letter dated _April 6th_. In _London_ I had scarce time to eat
bread, or to take my natural rest. Our blessed Saviour, with his own
right hand got himself the victory in many hearts, and brought mighty
things to pass. I never saw the like before. I must renew my old
request, “Help, my dear friend, help me to be thankful.” I am now
going a second time to _Scotland_, and purpose, GOD willing, at the
latter end of the year to embark for _America_. My soul is a thirst
for the salvation of poor sinners. These words, “Go ye into all
the world, and preach the gospel to every creature, &c.” have been
particularly pressed upon my heart. O, dear Mr. _C――――_, if the
LORD has accounted us worthy, putting us into the ministry, how
careful should we be to make full proof thereof? GOD willing, when
I come on shore I will begin in earnest. For alas! _hactenus nihil
feci_.――Indeed I am ashamed of myself from the bottom of my heart. Was
not my Master’s love like himself, _infinite_, I should have been cast
off long before this time. But I find those whom he loves, he loves
to the end. Mr. _W――――_, myself, and others, are instances of this.
I hope our great Shepherd will now carry him in his arms, and not let
him to stay again. I have wrote to Mr. _T――――_ from on board.――If you
go to him, or labour elsewhere, that the blessed JESUS may be always
with you, is the hearty prayer of, dear Mr. _C――――_,

        Your most affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCXX.

                   _To Mr. J―――― H――――, in London._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 29, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

YOUR letter much affected me. I hope the contents have made the angels
to rejoice, and that before this time you have found rest in the
wounded Lamb. That GOD, who first spoke light out of darkness, I trust
is beginning to shine into your heart, and to perfect a new creation
in your soul. You are not the first, dear friend, by thousands, who
have thought themselves rich and increased in goods, not considering
they were poor and miserable and blind and naked. I suppose you can
now join with me in the following verses:

                                 I.
             _Long did my soul in Jesu’s form
              No comeliness nor beauty see;
              His sacred name by others priz’d,
              Was tasteless still and dead to me._

                                II.
             _Men call’d me Christian, and my heart
              On that delusion fondly stay’d;
              Moral my hopes, my Saviour self,
              ’Till mighty grace the cheat display’d._

                                III.
             _Thanks to the hand that wak’d my dream,
              That shew’d me wretched, naked, poor;
              That sweetly led me to the Rock,
              Where all salvation stands secure._

                                IV.
             _Glad, I forsook my righteous pride,
              My moral, tarnish’d, sinful dress,
              Exchanged my dross away for CHRIST,
              And found the robe of righteousness._

These lines, dear Sir, I think are very emphatical. I trust you can
now repeat them from your heart. If so, hail happy man! JESUS hath
washed you in his blood, and given you eternal life. You now then have
nothing to do, but to live to him, who hath lived and died for you,
and if necessary would die again for you with all his heart. Surely
our Saviour loves you, otherwise he would not have shewed you all
these things. I love you for his sake (though unknown); and if he hath
been pleased to work by my unworthy ministry, let him have all the
glory, and forget not to pray for the poor, weak instrument, who has
not forgotten to pray for you, being, dear Sir,

        Your most affectionate friend and servant, in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXI.

                   _To Mr. H―――― H――――, in Wales._

                          _On board the Mary and Ann, May 29, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

THOUGH I could not write to you on shore, yet I must not omit writing
to you on board. I am heartily sorry that such a narrow spirit
prevails in _Wales_. I have written to Mr. _H――――_. But what shall we
say? The Redeemer’s love alone can unite and keep together his flocks.
Disputing with bigots and narrow-spirited people will not do. I intend
henceforward to say less to them, and pray more and more to our LORD
for them. “LORD, enlarge their hearts,” is my continual prayer for
such, who are so streightened in their own bowels. Blessed be GOD,
this partition-wall is breaking down daily in some of our old friends
hearts in _London_. I exhort all to go where they can profit most. I
preach what I believe to be the truth, and then leave it to the spirit
of GOD to make the application. When we have done this, I think we
have gone to the utmost bounds of our commission. O my brother, I find
more and more, nothing but that wisdom, which is from above, can teach
us how to build up souls. I never was so much assisted in this kind of
work, as since I came to _London_ last. We have public societies twice
a week, and a general meeting for reading letters once a month. Our
LORD has been much with us. We seem to move on now in gospel dignity,
and are terrible as an army with banners. If the LORD inclines you,
a visit to _London_ would be very acceptable. Our people can now bear
searching more than formerly. I find that our LORD hath particularly
blessed you that way. We have had a most blessed funeral of one of
our sisters in CHRIST, and the awakening, I think, has been as great
as when I first came out, and abundantly more solid. The _Easter_
Holidays were high days indeed. My wife doth not forget her friends in
_Wales_. But our LORD has seen fit to exercise her with exceeding
close inward trials. She and all with me most cordially salute you. I
expect great things in _Scotland_. If possible, at my return, I hope
to see you in _Wales_. But future things belong to GOD. Adieu. Forget
not to pray for

                  Your affectionate brother pilgrim,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXII.

                      _To Mr. A――――, in London._

                                          _Edinburgh, June 4, 1742._
  _My dear Brother A――――_,

FROM a heart overflowing with a sense of GOD’s love, I write you these
few lines. Yesterday our Saviour brought us hither. On board, I spent
most part of my time in secret prayer. Satan shot many of his fiery
darts against me. Our great _Michael_ gave me a shield of faith, by
which I was enabled to repel them all. As soon as I came on shore, the
holy spirit filled my soul. The LORD commanded people to receive me
and my fellow pilgrim into their houses. Our souls rejoiced in him.
The people were soon alarmed at my arrival. As soon as I came on shore
at _Leith_, many came blessing me, and weeping, took hold of me. About
four in the afternoon we came to _Edinburgh_. Great numbers followed
our coach, and almost catched me in their arms, as soon as I came out
of it. How did they weep for joy! It would have melted you down to
have seen them. When I came to my lodging, many dear friends came to
salute us in the name of the LORD. About seven o’clock I went to see
some persons of distinction, whose hearts the LORD reached, when I
was here last. Some were ready to faint with excess of joy: with these
I prayed and gave thanks. The Holy Ghost filled us with all joy and
peace in believing.――At eight I went to a nobleman’s house, where his
lady and several other dear friends received us with great gladness.
The cushions and bible were immediately brought. I gave a word of
exhortation. We sung, and prayed, and spent the remainder of the
evening most delightfully in talking of the things of GOD. When we
came home, we joined in blessing GOD’s holy name. Though late, I
scarce knew how to go to rest.――This morning I received glorious
accounts of the carrying on of the Mediator’s kingdom. The work of
GOD is beyond expression. Three of the little boys that were converted
when I was last here, came to me and wept, and begged me to pray for
and with them. A minister tells me, that scarce one is fallen back,
who was awakened, either among old or young. The serjeant, whose
letter, brother _C――――_ has, goes on well with his company. O my dear
brother, help me to praise the Lamb that sitteth upon the throne for
ever; and desire all the society to join with you. I believe within
these four months you will hear of very great things. Pray that I may
be very little in my own eyes, and not rob my dear Master of any part
of his glory. We do not forget you. Once a day we meet together and
pray for absent friends. He gives us leave, as it were, to ask of
him what we will, and promises never to leave or forsake us. For
the present, my dear brother, adieu! As opportunity offers, and if
possible every post, some or other of my dear friends shall hear, dear
brother _A――――_, from

         Your most affectionate, though most unworthy brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXIII.

                _To the Right Honourable Lord R――――._

                                          _Edinburgh, June 4, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

YESTERDAY morning our glorious _Emmanuel_ brought us hither. Your
Lordship’s kind letter was put into my hands. I heartily sympathize
with your Lordship; but could not help rejoicing on your honoured
lady’s account, knowing she is now entered into her blessed Master’s
joy. Indeed, my Lord, I think, among christians, death hath not only
lost its sting, but its name. I never was so joyful as I am now at
the death of those who die in the LORD; and never was so reconciled
to living myself. My general language, when I hear of the saints
departure, is, “Let them go.” Lately at _London_ we had a sister in
CHRIST departed. Her last words were, “Holy, holy, holy!” she could
say no more here; but our Saviour sent for her to finish her song in
heaven. I preached over her corpse; our society attended: but surely
never did souls triumph over death more than we did that night.
Many would say, “O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy
victory?” As for my own part, I was enabled to trample death under my
feet: and, blessed be GOD, through rich grace I can do that daily. But
then your Lordship may ask, “Why are you reconciled to life?” Because
I can do that for JESUS on earth, which I cannot do in heaven: I mean,
be made instrumental in bringing some poor, weary, heavy laden sinners
to find rest in his blood and righteousness: and, indeed, if our
Saviour was to offer either to take me now, or to stay only to take
one sinner more, I would desire to stay to take him with me. But
whither am I running? O my Lord, death is a delightful topic. Excuse
me if I forget myself when writing about it. Blessed be our GOD for
supporting your soul under so close a trial! How sweet will it be to
meet your Lady glorified at the great day! Yet a little while, and
that happy day shall come. But it is time to answer your Lordship’s
question: “How was you on the 24th of last _November_?” I thank GOD,
very well. My soul was much refreshed with the Redeemer’s presence;
and I was rejoicing in hope of the glory of GOD. I hear of wonderful
things in _Scotland_. I can only fall down and worship. I have seen
greater things than ever in _England_. I expect to see far greater in
_Scotland_. Our LORD will not let his people be disappointed of their
hopes. But I must away. We were very happy together with some other
dear friends last night. I have not seen your Lordship’s daughters,
though they have been so kind as to send to enquire after my health.
I hope to see them to-day; and am, my Lord, with all possible respect,
my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXIV.

             _To the Reverend Mr. M――――, at Cambuslang._

                                          _Edinburgh, June 8, 1742._
  _Reverend and very dear Brother_,

I Heartily rejoice at the awakening at _Cambuslang_, and elsewhere.
I believe you will both see and hear of far greater things than these.
I trust that not one corner of poor _Scotland_ will be left unwatered
by the dew of GOD’s heavenly blessing. The cloud is now only rising as
big as a man’s hand; yet a little while, and we shall hear a sound of
an abundance of gospel rain. Our glorious _Emmanuel_ has given us much
of his divine presence since my arrival. O that it may accompany me to
_Cambuslang_! GOD willing, I hope to be with you the beginning of next
week; but cannot exactly tell the day. In the mean while, forget not
to pray for, reverend and dear brother,

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXV.

           _To the Reverend Mr. E―――― E――――, at Sterling._

                                         _Edinburgh, June 10, 1742._
  _Reverend and very dear Sir_,

I Am now at Mr. _G――――_’s house; and finding his wife about to set out
for _Sterling_, the love which I bear you, for my dear Master’s sake,
constrains me to send you a line. It is some concern to me, that our
difference as to outward things, should cut off our sweet fellowship
and communion with each other. GOD knows my heart, I highly value
and honour you. Reverend and dear Sir, I do assure you I love you and
your brethren more than ever. I applaud your zeal for GOD; and though,
in some respects, I think it not according to knowledge, and to be
levelled frequently against me, yet indeed I feel no resentment in
my heart, and should joyfully sit down and hear you and your other
brethren preach. I salute them all; and pray our common LORD to give
us all a right judgment in all things. I hope the glorious _Emmanuel_
will be present at the sacrament, and make himself known to you in
breaking of bread. I have made bold to send you the inclosed pamphlets,
and should be glad to know your opinion of them. When I shall come to
_Sterling_, I know not. However, I earnestly pray for you and yours.
I could drop a tear. O when shall the time come, when the watchmen
will see eye to eye? Hasten that time, our LORD and our GOD! But
perhaps I am troublesome. Forgive me, reverend and dear Sir, being,
without dissimulation, your

         Younger brother and servant in the gospel of CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXVI.

                   _To Mr. D―――― A――――, in London._

                                          _Edinburgh, July 7, 1742._
  _Dear Friend_,

I Arrived here last _Saturday_ evening from the _West_, where I
preached all the last week: as, twice on _Monday_ at _Paisley_, six
miles from _Glasgow_; on the _Tuesday_ and _Wednesday_, three times
each day, at _Irvine_, 16 miles from thence; on _Thursday_, twice
at _Mearns_, fifteen miles from that; on _Friday_, three times at
♦_Cumbernauld_; and on _Saturday_, twice at _Falkirk_, in my way to
_Edinburgh_. In every place there was the greatest commotion among
the people as was ever known. Their mourning in most of the places,
was like the mourning for a first-born. The auditories were very
large, and the work of GOD seems to be spreading more and more. Last
sabbath-day I preached twice in the park, and once in the church, and
twice every day since. A number of seats and shades, in the form of an
amphitheatre, have been erected in the park, where the auditory sit in
a beautiful order. I have received very agreeable news from my family
abroad.――I purpose going to _Cambuslang_ to-morrow, in order to assist
at the communion; and shall preach at various places westward before
I return here. I intend to embark for _America_ as soon as possible
after I leave _Scotland_. Thus you see, my dear brother, how I have
been employed. O give thanks to our blessed Saviour, for his great
unparalleled goodness to a most unworthy worm. Indeed I have seen and
felt such things, as I never saw and felt before. I never was enabled
to preach so powerfully as whilst I have been in the _West_. I hear
that brother _C――――_ is in the country, and that you exhort in the
society. May the LORD open your mouth, and cause your lips to shew
forth his praise! Let us talk of his loving-kindness all the day long.
GOD gives me faith for my poor orphans. Help me with your prayers.
GOD will supply all my wants. Glory be to his name, I am kept from
doubting. My brother, I love you dearly. You have been a close and
faithful brother. May the LORD bless you and yours. Adieu! Pray fail
not of writing as particular as may be, to,

                 Most affectionately yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._

  ♦ ‘Cambernauld’ replaced with ‘Cumbernauld’


                          LETTER CCCCXXVII.

                 _To Mr. H――――, at the Orphan-house._

                                          _Edinburgh, July 7, 1742._
  _My very dear friend, faithful steward, and brother in_ CHRIST,

LAST _Monday_ I received an agreeable packet of letters from you. I
think they are dated in _October_ and _December_ last. They rejoiced
our hearts. As soon as I read yours, my wife said, let us give thanks
and pray. Accordingly we kneeled down, and had very near access to the
Father of Mercies on your behalf. At night, after our coming home, we
did the same. Our common LORD enabled us to wrestle in faith. We all
felt our hearts drawn mightily towards you. I could wish for wings to
fly unto you. I long to thank you in person, for your faithfulness to
your poor unworthy, but most affectionate friend. My dear brother, GOD
is still doing greater things for me than ever. The awakening here in
_Scotland_ is unspeakable. The congregations in the _West_, are just
like those which you and I saw at _Foggs-Manor_, in _Pensylvania_.
GOD seems to awaken scores together. I never was enabled to preach so
before. O that I may lie low at the feet of my dear Redeemer! to whose
image I am studying to be more conformed every day. Your letter to
dear brother _A――――_ pleased us very much. I have desired him to print
it. I paid a three hundred pound bill drawn upon me by Mr. _N――――_, as
well as Mr. _B――――_’s: whether you include that in the eleven thousand
pounds, I know not. However, blessed be GOD, if it were eleven
thousand more I hope I should be kept from doubting. At present, I am
looking up to our great Housholder for fresh supplies; which I believe
he will give me, and which I will send to you as soon as possible.
I hope to see you soon, and to thank you in particular for your
faithfulness to me. My friend and brother, you shall in no wise lose
your reward. I believe GOD will take _Georgia_ into his own hands. Its
affairs have lately been before the House of Commons. Mr. _Ste――――_
was reprimanded for his abuse of the trustees; the use of rum was
granted, but the use of slaves denied. Let us stand still, be instant
in prayer, and we shall certainly see the salvation of GOD. I am
yet made to hope against hope, in behalf of poor _Georgia_. The LORD
strengthen your weak body, and continually comfort your soul. That you
may be filled with all the fulness of GOD, is the hearty prayer of,
dear Mr. _H――――_,

        Yours eternally in the strictest bonds of gospel love,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXVIII.

                        _To Mrs. Whitefield._

                                          _Edinburgh, July 7, 1742._
  _My dear Love_,

SINCE I wrote the last, I have seen such things as I never beheld
before. Yesterday morning I preached at _Glasgow_ to a very large
congregation. At noon I came to _Cambuslang_, the place which GOD hath
so much honoured. I preached at two, to a vast body of people, and
at six in the evening, and again at nine at night. Such a commotion
surely never was heard of, especially at eleven at night. It far
out-did all that I ever saw in _America_. For about an hour and a
half there was such weeping, so many falling into deep distress, and
expressing it various ways, as is inexpressible. The people seem to
be slain by scores. They are carried off, and come into the house
like soldiers wounded in, and carried off a field of battle. Their
cries and agonies are exceedingly affecting. Mr. _M――――_ preached
after I had ended, till past one in the morning, and then could scarce
persuade them to depart. All night in the fields, might be heard
the voice of prayer and praise. Some young ladies were found by a
gentlewoman praising GOD at break of day. She went and joined with
them. The LORD is indeed much with me. I have preached twice to-day
already, and am to preach twice, perhaps three times more. The
commotions increase. To-morrow, and on sabbath-day, I shall preach at
_Calder_; on _Monday_, here again; and on _Tuesday_ at _Kilsyth_, and
then, GOD willing, at _Glasgow_. I am persuaded the work will spread
more and more. My kindest respects to all. Accept of the same from, my
dear love,

                              Yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXIX.

               _To the Reverend Mr. W――――, of Dundee._

                                          _Edinburgh, July 7, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

YOUR letter gave me some little concern, I thought it breathed much of
a sectarian spirit; to which I hoped dear Mr. _W――――_ was quite averse.
Methinks you seem, dear Sir, not satisfied, unless I declare myself a
Presbyterian, and openly renounce the church of _England_. GOD knows
that I have been faithful in bearing a testimony against what I think
is corrupt in that church. I have shewn my freedom in communicating
with the church of _Scotland_, and in baptizing children their own way.
I can go no further. As for what you mention about the Quakers, I know
not what particular exceptionable passages there were in my sermons,
in which I mentioned them. That some good souls are among the
Quakers, I doubt not.――For such I have charity, because our LORD hath
given to them his spirit.――Though I am a strenuous defender of the
righteousness of CHRIST, and utterly detest _Arminian_ principles, yet
I know that GOD gave me the Holy Ghost, before I was clear in either
as to head-knowledge: and therefore, dear Sir, I am the more moderate
to people who are not clear, supposing I see the divine image stamped
upon their hearts. Mr. _W――――_, Mr. _L――――_, &c. I take to be holy men
of GOD, though they think far widely from me, and from each other in
some particular branches of doctrine. Dear Sir, be not offended at my
plain speaking. I find but few of a truly catholic spirit. Most are
catholic till they bring persons over to their own party, and there
they would fetter them. I have not so learned CHRIST. I desire to act
as GOD acts. I shall approve, and join with all who are good in every
sect, and cast a mantle of love over all that are bad, so far as is
consistent with a good conscience. This I can do without temporizing;
nay I should defile my conscience if I did otherwise. As for my
answer to Mr. _M――――_, dear Sir, it is very satisfying to my own soul.
Morning and evening retirement is certainly exceeding good; but if
through weakness of body, or frequency of preaching, I cannot go to
GOD in my usual set times, I think my spirit is not in bondage. It
is not for me to tell how often I use secret prayer; if I did not use
it, nay, if in one sense I did not pray without ceasing, it would be
difficult for me to keep up that frame of soul, which by the divine
blessing I daily enjoy. If the work of GOD prospers, and your hands
become more full, you will then, dear Sir, know better what I mean.
But enough of this. GOD knows my heart, I would do every thing I
possibly could, to satisfy all men, and give a reason of the hope that
is in me with meekness and fear; but I cannot satisfy all that are
waiting for an occasion to find fault: our LORD could not; I therefore
despair of doing it. However, dear Sir, I take what you have said in
very good part: only I think you are too solicitous to clear up my
character to captious and prejudiced men. Let my master speak for me.
Blessed be GOD, he will, so long as I simply throw myself into his
almighty arms. I am glad the work goes on with you. Glory be to GOD,
we have seen glorious things in the _West_. My tender love to all that
are pleased to remember me. When I shall come your way, I know not.
On _Friday_, GOD willing, I go to _Cambuslang_, where I expect to see
great days of the son of man. That GOD may bless you abundantly more
and more, and cause your latter end greatly to increase, is the hearty
prayer of, reverend and dear Sir,

                              Yours &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXX.

               _To the Reverend Mr. A――――, in Dublin._

                                           _Glasgow, July 12, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

ON _Saturday_ I received your very kind letter, and being just now
returned from _Cambuslang_, I snatch a few moments to acknowledge it.
I have long since waited for a call to _Ireland_. In such an important
step, I care not to proceed without great caution. When I find the
cloud of divine providence moving your way, I trust the language of
my heart will be, LORD, I come to do or suffer thy will! In the mean
while, I will watch unto prayer. I doubt not but you, reverend and
dear Sir, will help me herein. I thank you most heartily, for being
jealous over me. I believe it is with a godly jealousy. I wish I was
more jealous over myself. But blessed be GOD, this I can say in the
midst of the honours wherewith the glorious _Emmanuel_ hath honoured
me, “Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me, but unto thy name be all the
glory.” Dear Sir, I think I am the worst of the sons of men. Yet I
dare not deny what the blessed JESUS hath done for my sinful soul. He
is pleased (O infinitely condescending GOD!) to honour me still more
and more. _Saturday_ last I came to _Cambuslang_, and I think I never
saw such things before. The work seems to be spreading. O that it may
reach and overspread poor _Ireland_ also! All things are possible with
GOD. Now the LORD is watering so many other places, I pray he may not
leave that intirely destitute and dry.――O for faith to expect great,
and very great things from GOD! He does not love to disappoint people
of their hope. Dear Sir, my heart is now enlarged with a sense of
the freeness and fulness of the Redeemer’s loving-kindness. You, dear
Sir, are an old weather beaten soldier. You are ripened for glory, and
are ready to sing your _Nunc dimittis_¹.――I am just about to begin to
be a soldier. But, blessed be GOD, I shall follow soon. The hopes of
bringing more souls to JESUS CHRIST, is the only consideration that
can reconcile me to life. For this cause I can willingly stay long
from my wish’d-for home, my wished-for JESUS. But whither am I going?
I forget myself when writing of JESUS . His love fills my soul, O free
grace! Surely I shall sing the loudest in heaven; but I must have done;
nature calls for rest. Depending on the continuance of your prayers,
and with my hearty salutation to all that love the blessed JESUS, I
subscribe myself, reverend and dear Sir,

   Your most affectionate, though younger and most unworthy brother
             and servant in the gospel of GOD’s dear Son,

                                                             _G. W._

  ¹ Now lettest thou thy servant, &c.


                           LETTER CCCCXXXI.

                   _To Mr. J―――― C――――, in London._

                                    _New-Kilpatrick, July 15, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

OF all my fellow-labourers letters, I think yours come the sweetest
to my soul. You do not forget the rock from whence you was hewn, and
therefore the LORD will honour you more and more. Though I have so
small a degree of humility myself, I can see and admire it in others.
It is the queen of graces. O beg of the exalted JESUS to make me
humble. Indeed I have need of humility, for I am honoured more and
more. What I have sent you already, does not near come up to what I
have seen since. Last _Thursday_ night, and _Friday_ morning, there
was such a shock in _Edinburgh_ as I never felt before. O what a
melting and weeping was there! I have heard blessed effects of it
since. All glory be to GOD through CHRIST. On _Friday_ night I came to
_Cambuslang_, to assist at the blessed sacrament. On _Saturday_ I
preached to above twenty thousand people. In my prayer the power
of GOD came down and was greatly felt. In my two sermons, there was
yet more power. On sabbath day, scarce ever was such a sight seen in
_Scotland_. There were undoubtedly upwards of twenty thousand people.
Two tents were set up, and the holy sacrament was administered in
the fields. When I began to serve a table, the power of GOD was felt
by numbers; but the people crouded so upon me, that I was obliged
to desist and go to preach at one of the tents, whilst the ministers
served the rest of the tables. GOD was with them, and with his people.
There was preaching all day by one or another, and in the evening,
when the sacrament was over, at the request of the ministers I
preached to the whole congregation. I preached about an hour and a
half. Surely it was a time much to be remembered. On _Monday_ morning,
I preached again to near as many; but such an universal stir I never
saw before. The motion fled as swift as lightning from one end of the
auditory to another. You might have seen thousands bathed in tears.
Some at the same time wringing their hands, others almost swooning,
and others crying out, and mourning over a pierced Saviour. But I must
not attempt to describe it. In the afternoon, the concern again was
very great. Much prayer had been previously put up to the LORD. All
night in different companies, you might have heard persons praying to,
and praising GOD. The children of GOD came from all quarters. It was
like the passover in _Josiah_’s time. We are to have another in about
two or three months, if the LORD will. One Mr. _W――――_, a minister,
who has great popular gifts, was as well as others much owned and
helped at this time. On _Tuesday_ morning I preached at _Glasgow_, (it
was a most glorious time) and in the afternoon twice at _Inchannon_.
The LORD gave a blow to many. Yesterday morning I preached there
again, and here twice. Every time there was a great stir, especially
at this place. A great company of awakened souls is within the compass
of twenty miles, and the work seems to be spreading apace. I am
exceedingly strengthened, O unmerited mercy! both in soul and body,
and cannot now do well without preaching three times a day. The LORD
gives me great confidence about the Orphan-house, and assures me that
he will provide for me and mine. O help me to thank him. Call upon all
to bless his holy name. I know you will not be slack to praise him. I
rejoice, my dear brother, to find that you enjoy so much of GOD. May
he fill you with all his fulness. The trials you meet with, will only
make you a more able minister of the New Testament. I am of your mind
with respect to ――――. He will not prosper. The LORD hates sectarian
zeal. Dear brother, adieu. Expect to hear every opportunity from

    Yours most affectionately and eternally in the blessed JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXII.

               _To the Reverend Mr. R――――, in London._

                                         _Inchannon, July 21, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

I Heartily rejoice that the LORD is blessing and owning you. Go on,
dear Sir, go on, and you will certainly find the glorious _Emmanuel_
will be with you more and more. It is observable, that there is but
one thing in scripture, that we are commanded to do out of season,
_preaching_. Be instant therefore, dear Sir, in season and out of
season. The LORD will stand by you and strengthen you, and deliver you
from wicked and unreasonable men. You will find the blessedness of the
cross, and the spirit of CHRIST and of glory to rest upon your soul.
The Messrs. _E――――_ and their adherents, would you think it, have
appointed a publick fast to humble themselves, among other things, for
my being received in _Scotland_, and for the delusion, as they term it,
at _Cambuslang_, and other places; and all this, because I would not
consent to preach only for them, till I had light into, and could take
the solemn league and covenant.――But to what lengths may prejudice
carry even good men?――From giving way to the first risings of bigotry
and a party spirit, good LORD deliver us!

              Your most affectionate brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXIII.

                  _To Mr. M―――― A――――, at Morpeth._

                                         _Edinburgh, July 26, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

I Just now received and read your letter. It much affected me. It
bespeaks the language of an uneasy restless heart. In reading it, I
thought of the great _Austin_, who used, when he prayed against lust,
secretly to wish that his prayer might not be answered, and yet he
made a most eminent saint, and shone in the church as a star of the
first magnitude. I likewise thought how our Saviour would receive
you, if here on earth; even as he received and answered the poor woman
taken in adultery.――I am sure he would say, “Neither do I condemn
thee.” Another text offers itself, “I will heal their backslidings,
and love them freely.” GOD does not say, I will heal thy backsliding
for any certain term of years, but I will heal thy backslidings in
general. Dear Sir, if you have been a backslider these fifty years,
nay, was it possible for you to have been a backslider a thousand
years, yet if with hearty repentance and true faith you turn unto
him, he will abundantly pardon you. O dear Sir, if any one had need
to despair of mercy, I had; but JESUS has washed me in his blood,
and I know that my Redeemer liveth. Your temptations, and atheism,
and hard thoughts of GOD, do not surprize me. Dear Sir, what else can
be expected from a heart desperately wicked, and deceitful above all
things? Dear Sir, let all this drive you to the fountain which is open
for sin and all uncleanness. I once, in your circumstances, thought
CHRIST was hard-hearted; but now I find, nay have long since found,
that his heart is full of love. Take courage, dear Sir; draw near to
the Lamb of GOD that taketh away the sin of the world. Return, thou
wandering prodigal, thy heavenly father is running to meet thee.――Come
back, thou fluttering dove, JESUS is ready to take thee into the ark.
May GOD bless this to you! If he does, I will bless his name. I am a
vile sinner, and have need to lie low before him, whom I have pierced
by my transgression and unprofitableness, times without number. In his
blood and righteousness I find perpetual refuge. Many in these parts
are flying to him. May you, Sir, add to the happy number. You are but
a sinner, and JESUS died for sinners. Come and welcome to JESUS CHRIST.
I expect to remain in _Scotland_ a few months, and hope to be your way,
if the LORD direct. If your way should be directed hither, I should
be glad to see you; if not, you are welcome to write to me. As my
multiplicity of affairs will admit, you shall be answered by, dear Sir,

        Your truly affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXIV.

                    _To the Reverend Mr. McL――――._

                                         _Edinburgh, July 28, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

WITH this, I suppose, you will receive several young ones, who I think
have acted wrong in leaving their respective employs under parents
and masters to go after me. Be pleased to examine them, and send them
home. The LORD was with me at _Falkirk_, and is pleased to work by me
here. O free grace! I am persuaded I shall have more power, since dear
Mr. _G――――_ hath printed such a bitter pamphlet. Now I begin to be a
disciple of JESUS CHRIST, I rejoice and am exceeding glad. The archers
shot sore at me that I might fall, but the LORD is, and the LORD will
be my helper. At present I can add no more; but beg the continuance of
your prayers for me and mine. We all join in hearty salutation to you
and your whole houshold. I am, reverend and dear Sir,

      Your most obedient humble servant, and brother in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXXXV.

                   _To Mr. D―――― A――――, in London._

                                         _Edinburgh, July 30, 1742._
  _Dear Brother A――――_,

WHAT is the meaning I hear no oftner from you? It always gives me
great pleasure to hear of your welfare. I write to you as often as
possible. At present I am somewhat indisposed in body; but, glory be
to GOD, the joy of the LORD is in my soul. I feel a blessing I cannot
express.


                                                         _July 31._

So far I wrote yesterday, but was obliged through illness to leave
off.――Notwithstanding, in the pulpit the LORD out of weakness makes
me to wax strong, and causes me to triumph more and more. One of the
associate presbytery has published the most virulent pamphlet I ever
saw, ascribing all that has been done here, and even in _New-England_,
&c. to the influence of the devil. O how prejudice will blind the eyes
even of good men. Last night some of my friends thought I was going
off; but how did JESUS fill my heart! To-day I am, as they call it,
much better; next post, if able, I will send you some more news. My
health will not permit me to enlarge now. In less than a month, we
are to have another sacrament at _Cambuslang_, a thing not practised
before in _Scotland_. I entreat all to pray in an especial manner for
a blessing at that time. Our blessed master is exceeding good to us.
O help me to praise him for the signal unmerited mercies conferred on,
dear brother _A――――_,

        Your most affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXVI.

               _To Mr. H―――― B――――, in South-Carolina._

                                                   _August 6, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

I Have just been walking with a nobleman
in his fine house, and likewise talking with him about the house not
made with hands, of which you and I are heirs. Blessed be GOD, who
has given us the earnest of an inheritance amongst all them that are
sanctified. This you shall surely in a very little time be a possessor
of, notwithstanding of late satan has bruised your heel. That cunning,
cruel archer has shot sorely at you, that you might fall, but the
LORD has been, and the LORD will be your helper. Even this shall work
together for good to your own and many other souls. Our Saviour would
never have given satan leave to have sifted you, had he not prayed
for you, and intended to bring great good out of it. If it makes
you more like a little child, and your friends and acquaintance more
watchful and self-diffident, it will be very well. O dear Sir, I
see every day plainer and plainer that I am nothing, have nothing,
and can do nothing, and yet I can do all things through JESUS CHRIST
strengthening me. What GOD has lately done for me and his church, is
unspeakable. Ere long I hope to tell you face to face. In the mean
time, be pleased to remember me in your prayers and praises. Accept
my hearty thanks for all favours conferr’d on my orphan family. Be
pleased to remember me in the kindest and most cordial manner, to all
your dear relations, and believe me to be, dear Mr. _B――――_,

            Your most obliged affectionate friend, brother
                        and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXVII.

                        _To Mr. R―――― S――――._

                                   _Strath-martin, August 10, 1742._
  _Dear brother Robert_,

I Can never let a letter of yours lie long unanswered. The love I
bear to you and yours is unfeigned, and I continually remember you
before the LORD. His word runs and is much glorified in these parts.
I trust it also makes advances in your soul. How is it with you, my
dear brother _R――――_? Do you grow in grace? Is the world more under
your feet than usual? Do you find a real, solid, abiding rest in
JESUS CHRIST? Or is it only transitory and superficial? It is a very
uncommon thing to be rooted and grounded in the love of JESUS. I find
persons may have the idea, but are far from having the real substance.
To say, “I am a poor sinner,” and to be a poor sinner indeed, are two
different things. Methinks I hear my dear man say, and so they are.
Well then, let us go to JESUS, and he will make us poor and yet free.
Blessed be his name, I feel the power of his precious, life-giving,
all-atoning blood more and more every day. I was happy when at
_London_. I am ten times happier now. The LORD hath done great things
for us, whereof we are glad. How is my dear _Peter_? Is his heart yet
established and settled upon the rock? Or is the dove only fluttering
about the door of the ark? If so, may the dear Redeemer reach out
his almighty and extended arm, and take him in! Dear _B――――_ I hope
grows, because he seems to see more of his heart. We shall certainly
bear fruit upwards, in proportion as we take root downwards. May the
eternal spirit breathe upon this letter, and bless it to your soul!
O my brother, keep close to JESUS. Do not be content, unless you feel
a sensible growth in your soul. Accept my hearty love from,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCCXXXVIII.

                        _To P――――, at London._

                                   _Strath-martin, August 10, 1742._
  _Dear P――――_,

THE great trouble which I gave you when at _London_, and the readiness
you shewed in waiting upon a poor unworthy minister of CHRIST, hath
made me often to pray for you, and also to hope, that in time you
would be brought to love the LORD JESUS himself. I trust that time is
now come, and that the glorious _Emmanuel_ hath at length captivated
and taken full possession of your heart. Will you give me leave to ask
a few friendly questions? Has religion sunk out of your head into your
heart? You was civilized when I was at _London_: Are you yet really
converted? Your affections were now and then raised towards,――are they
now centered in and fixed on the LORD JESUS? If you can answer these
questions in the affirmative, I pronounce you a wise virgin, even wise
to eternal salvation; blessed art thou among women. If not, I do not
despair of you. JESUS can change the heart. JESUS can make of a proud
pharisee, a poor sinner. Let you and I then, dear _P――――_, apply to
the Redeemer’s blood. He can wash us as white as snow. I feel his
power every day more and more, and so do those with me. May we go on
from strength to strength, till grace be swallowed up in glory. We
see great days of the son of man in _Scotland_. May the kingdom of GOD
come with full power over all the earth! The LORD be with you. Accept
this as a token of unfeigned love, from

           Your affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXXXIX.

                 _To Mr. B――――, at the Orphan-house._

                                      _Cambuslang, August 17, 1742._

AND has my dear brother _B――――_ got the start of me? What, put into
prison before me? I wish you joy, my dear brother, with all my heart.
Had I been at _Savannah_, surely I would gladly have come (and if
there had been need) gladly have washed your feet. I doubt not but
your imprisonment was for CHRIST’s sake. I am persuaded, the letter
from your friend that doubted, was the sorest stab of all; but all
is intended to draw us from the creature, even from the new creature,
and bring us nearer to the Creator, GOD blessed for evermore. _Paul_’s
friends deserted, and no doubt judged him. “All they in _Asia_ forsook
me,” says he; and again, “At my first trial no man stood by me;”
and what follows? but “the LORD stood by me:” and will he not, dear
brother, also stand by you? I cannot help believing but that _Georgia_
will yet be a glorious colony. The counsel of GOD shall stand. He
surely put it into my heart to build the Orphan-house. He certainly
brought you to _Georgia_ to superintend it. He will bless you and
yours. I join in blessing GOD with you, and in admiring how he has
spread a table for my dear family in that wilderness. But what shall
we say? The LORD loves to encourage faith; and since his honour is so
much concerned, I am sure he will vindicate it, and never suffer his
enemies to say thus of us, “There, there, so would we have it.” I am
kept from the least doubting; and GOD only knows how many prayers of
faith I have put up for you. I have often wished as it were for the
wings of a dove, that I might fly unto you, and take you one by one
into my unworthy arms, and weep over you with tears of love. Blessed
be GOD, the time draws near apace. I am just now about to publish a
further account of the Orphan-house, and hope shortly to collect some
more money towards its support. I am blessed with far greater success
than ever, and satan roars louder. You will see by what I here send,
how the archers of different classes shoot at me; but the LORD (for
ever adored be his never-failing love) causes my bow to abide in
strength, and enables me to triumph in every place. The comforts
and success the LORD gives to me, is unspeakable. Last LORD’s day, I
believe there were here thirty thousand people, and above two thousand
five hundred communicants. The work spreads, and I believe will yet
spread. My bodily strength is daily renewed, and I mount on the wings
of faith and love like an eagle. I can only cry Grace! grace! My dear
brother, I feel every day more and more, that I am a poor, very poor
sinner. I often wonder why JESUS suffers me to live, much more to
speak for him. But he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. O
free grace! Oh unparalleled love of an infinitely condescending GOD!
Whilst I am musing, the fire kindles. Surely we shall have a happy
meeting in _Georgia_. My Master will, I trust, come along with me.
Otherwise, may I not go up hence. In the mean while, I pray him to
quicken and revive your dear souls, and fill you as with new wine.
Thus he deals with me and mine daily. I am retired for a day, on
purpose to write letters. The LORD bless them to your dear souls, whom
I love in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST. I wish you had told me who stood
by at _Savannah_ and brought you refreshment. Greet them, and give
them particular thanks in my name. My heart is full; I know not how to
stop. But I must write to the trustees, and to others. I heard nothing
of the affair, till I received your letter last week. A word or two
of yours to Mr. _O――――_, I think a little too harsh; but _Paul_ spoke
once a little too harsh to the high-priest. Our JESUS will overlook
this; and reward you for your imprisonment by and by. Adieu! my dear
man, adieu! Forget not,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCXL.

              _To the Honourable Trustees for Georgia._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 17, 1742._
  _Honoured Gentlemen_,

SOME letters, which I received last week from _Georgia_, occasion my
troubling you with this, which I doubt not will meet with a candid
reception at your hands. I find that Mr. _H――――_ and Mr. _B――――_ have
been taken up by a warrant, and were imprisoned above a week, for a
thing which, I believe, none of you, honoured gentlemen, will judge
cognizable by the civil magistrate. It seems that Mr. _B――――_, in a
private conversation with Mr. _O――――_, (who, I suppose, is the present
minister of _Savannah_) told him, “He was no ‘christian’; that he
wondered at the impudence of young men in subscribing articles they
did not believe; and that he should think it his duty to warn his
friends not to hear him.” I acknowledge that such language was too
harsh; but Mr. _H――――_, who did not say near so much, was linked in
the same prosecution, and imprisoned with him. Mr. _J――――_, who was
then at _Frederica_, being informed of it, declared such a procedure
to be illegal; and his Excellency General _Oglethorp_, desired my
friends to lay the matter before the board of the Honourable Trustees.
I being now upon the spot, they have sent to me a very particular
account of what has passed; which, if you please, honoured gentlemen,
I will transmit unto you, or, when I come to _London_, will wait upon
you in person. I find also, that my friends were denied a copy of
the proceedings of the court: in which, I am persuaded the honourable
gentlemen to whom I am writing, will think they have been wronged.
My friends require no satisfaction, but only desire such a proceeding
may be animadverted upon; knowing that otherwise it will be a great
discouragement to people’s settling in _Georgia_. I am sorry also
to inform you, honoured gentlemen, that five very small children,
(_Swiss_ or _Dutch_) whose parents lately died in their passage from
_England_, have had their goods sold at _Vendue_, and are bound out
till the age of twenty-one years. This I think directly contrary
to the grant given me by you, honoured gentlemen; for thereby I
was impowered to take as many orphans into the house as my fund
would admit of. The magistrates, I understand, have also been at the
Orphan-house, and claim a power to take away the children when they
please, whether the children chuse it, or complain of ill-treatment,
or not. This grieves some of the children, and makes others of them
insolent, who are hereby taught, that they have a power to go away
when they will. This, honoured gentlemen, must be very discouraging to
those who are entrusted with their education; and who, I am persuaded,
aim at nothing but the glory of GOD, the welfare of the colony, and
the salvation of the children’s souls. I suppose that the magistrates
(I mean Mr. _P――――_ and Mr. _T――――_) have taken such a liberty from
the instructions which were sent, honoured gentlemen, from you some
time ago. But Mr. _J――――_ has told them, they have misunderstood you;
and his Excellency General _Oglethorp_ I find has wrote to you,
honoured gentlemen, about it. By the accounts I have, our plantation
thrives well; and Mr. _H――――_ hopes we shall do with white servants
alone. I do assure you, honoured gentlemen, I will do all I can, with
the most disinterested views, to promote the good of _Georgia_: only
I beg the management of the Orphan-house, and orphans, may be secured
to me and my successors for ever; and that the magistrates be not
suffered to disturb us, when there is no ground of complaint. They
acknowledged, when at the Orphan-house last, that the children were
taken good care of, both as to their bodies and souls; and will it
not then, honoured gentlemen, tend much to the welfare of the colony,
that the Orphan-house should meet with all possible encouragement.
His Excellency General _Oglethorp_ has informed my friend Mr. _H――――_,
that, if I desired it, he thought you would grant me a greater tract
of land, which I should be obliged to give away in a certain term of
years, and that we might have our own magistrates, as have the people
of _Ebenezer_. Whether I shall desire such a favour, I know not; but,
if I should, I desire to know, what you, honoured gentlemen, would
say to it. Many have applied to me to settle in _Georgia_; hitherto
I could give them no encouragement. I wish I may be enabled to give
them a great deal for the future. Indeed, honoured gentlemen, I do not
desire to find fault. I doubt not but you have been prejudiced both
against me and my friends. The event will shew what friends we are to
_Georgia_. The Orphan-house will certainly be of great utility to the
colony; and the children educated therein, I trust, will be the glory
of the society to which they belong. They are bred up to industry, as
well as to other things; and are taught to fear GOD, and honour the
king. I am glad to hear that you have lately sent over a gentleman
who (I suppose) will do justice. I think I desire nothing else; and
heartily pray GOD to bless him, and you, honoured gentlemen, and all
that are concerned in the management of _Georgia_ affairs. I hope to
be in town in about two months; in the mean while, I would beg the
favour of a line by your secretary; and also entreat you, honoured
gentlemen, to write to the magistrates of _Savannah_, to let the
Orphan-house managers alone. If I or my friends should happen to
say or do any thing amiss, I assure you, honoured gentlemen, you
shall have all possible satisfaction given you by them, and also by,
honoured gentlemen,

                      Your very humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLI.

                     _To Mr. H――――, in Georgia._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 17, 1742._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

WITH a great deal of pleasure I received your letters dated _May 14th_,
_26th_, _29th_, and _June 1st_. Blessed be GOD! for all his goodness,
in providing for my dear family in that wilderness, by such various
unexpected ways. It caused my heart to leap for joy. I find you have
been wrongfully imprisoned. I should have been glad (if time had
permitted) that you had wrote me word, how it has been with your soul
under such a circumstance. I hope the spirit of CHRIST and of glory
rested upon you. Glad should I have been to have sung and prayed
with you; but my hour is not yet come. I have just now wrote to the
trustees, and intend waiting upon them as soon as I come to _London_.
I am persuaded the LORD will influence their hearts to do us justice.
I am glad you wrote so properly to the General, and that GOD hath
given you favour in his sight. “When a man’s ways please the LORD,
he makes his very enemies to be at peace with him.” I intend sending
him and Mr. _Jones_ a letter of thanks. I owe Mr. _S――――_ only about
ninety pounds, and about a hundred and fifty more in all, upon the
Orphan-house account in _England_. I am just publishing a further
account, which I am persuaded the LORD will bless. I would not have
you to undertake any business you do not like. I think the LORD has
fitted you for your present station. Professor _Franck_ held it
dangerous to change persons frequently, who were entrusted with the
care of the orphans. I am of your opinion as to hiring servants.――It
is impossible to tell you, my dear man, what I have seen, heard, and
felt since I came last to _Scotland_. The glorious _Emmanuel_ rides
daily on in the chariot of his gospel, from conquering and to conquer.
The congregations are just like that at _Fogg-Manor_.――I am opposed
on all sides. Dear Mr. _E――――_’s people have lately kept a fast
upon my account. The kirk presbyters also, now they see the Seceders
splitting, notwithstanding I have been instrumental in GOD’s hands,
in some degree, in stopping the secession, begin to call some of their
ministers to account for employing me: but who can stand before envy?
In the midst of all, my dear Master keeps me leaning upon himself,
and causes me to walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost from morning
to night. I wish time would have allowed you to have wrote a little
about his love, and to have abounded more in thanks for the opportune
supplies which he sent you. But I am sure that my dear Mr. _H――――_ is
not wanting in either of these. I think that I see you grow in grace.
I assure you, you are dearer to me than ever. My wife readily excuses
your not writing, knowing what it is to be in a hurry of business. O
pray that we may have a prosperous voyage to you, by the will of GOD.
By this time I suppose you are a father. May GOD teach you and your
wife how to order the child! I have much to say to you both, when
I see you. My dear old friend, and first fellow-traveller, GOD has
yet great blessings in store for us. He will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he with-hold from them that lead a godly
life. Methinks I am conversing with you now. May GOD give us a happy
meeting! He will, he will! For the present I must bid my dear man good
night. I stole this day from public preaching, to dispatch my private
affairs. All join in hearty love to, and prayers for you. Accept of
the same in the most tender manner, from, my dear Mr. _H――――_,

   Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant till death,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLII.

                _To his Excellency General Oglethorp._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 18, 1742._
  _Honoured Sir_,

I Most heartily thank you for being so kind to my family in _Georgia_,
and for espousing my friends cause when I think they were apparently
wronged. In a letter, I yesterday laid the case before the honourable
trustees, not doubting but they will preserve us from oppression, and
from persecution in all its shapes. I think we have only the glory
of GOD, and the good of the colony at heart. Prejudices may be raised
against us by evil reports and misrepresentations; but your Excellency
is more noble than to hearken to insinuations, which are not supported
by evident matters of fact. I am sure GOD will bless you for defending
the cause of the fatherless, and espousing the cause of injured
innocence. My friends, I trust, will at all times readily acknowledge
any thing they may either say or do wrong; and, if I know any thing of
my own heart, I would not offend any one causelessly and wilfully, for
the world. In a few months I hope to see _Georgia_. In the mean while,
I beg your Excellency to accept these few lines of thanks from,
honoured Sir,

            Your Excellency’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXLIII.

                 _To Thomas J――――, Esq., in Georgia._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 18, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. J――――_,

WITH this I send you my repeated thanks for your great kindness to
my dear family. The Father of Mercies and the GOD of all Consolations
will plentifully reward you for such well-doing. In a few months
I hope to thank you in person. GOD hath done, and is still doing
greater things for me than I am able to express. Indeed many souls
have been born again, both in _England_ and _Scotland_, since I left
you at _Georgia_. I desire to cast my crown at the feet of JESUS,
and to cry Grace! grace! Dear Sir, what a charming word is that? I am
sure I can freely own, that all my salvation is of grace, unmerited,
distinguishing, electing grace! If I could be saved by my own
righteousness, I had rather be saved by the righteousness of CHRIST;
because that way of salvation brings most glory to our glorious GOD. I
doubt not but Mr. _J――――_ is like-minded. May he be so more and more,
and daily feel the full power of the Redeemer’s blood! Be pleased to
remember me to all that are pleased to enquire after unworthy me, who
am, dear Sir,

                Your most obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLIV.

                _To Mrs. B――――, at the Orphan-house._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 18, 1742._
  _Dear Sister B――――_,

HAS the LORD called for your dear lambs? If so, I trust you have been
enabled to say, “The LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away: blessed
be the name of the LORD.” I am glad to find you was so well reconciled
to your dear husband’s imprisonment. It is sweet when wives are
strengthened to encourage their husbands in a suffering hour. Then
are they helps meet for them indeed. You do well, my dear Sister, to
lament the vileness of your heart. I find more and more that my heart
is desperately wicked. But, blessed be GOD, I have a fountain to go
and wash in every moment, even the blessed fountain of the Mediator’s
blood. There I can have free access; there I can wash, and daily be
made clean. Indeed, my dear sister, without dissimulation, I am a poor,
very poor sinner; but I am rich in JESUS, and rejoice in his great
salvation from day to day. I long to see you and my dear family, to
acquaint you what GOD hath done for my soul: and yet he is still doing
more and more. He does, he will delight to honour me. I thank you
for the great respect you pay me for his great name’s sake. I will
endeavour not to be behind with you, and the rest of my dear friends,
in humility and love. I am, my dear sister, most sincerely,

   Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLV.

                           _To Mr. B――――._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 18, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. B――――_,

I Think there is a mystery in the LORD’s dealing with you and your
brother. Surely he would never suffer you to be thus tempted, did he
not intend to honour you by and by. What our Saviour does to us now we
know not; it is enough that he hath assured us we shall know hereafter.
I rejoice to hear that you have so many christian negroes. I hope they
are only the first-fruits of a more glorious harvest. Though the work
may be at a stop for a while, fear not; JESUS will revive his own work
in his own time. Notwithstanding our blunders, imprudence, and the
opposition of enemies from without, yet the counsel of the LORD shall
stand, and he will set his king upon his holy hill of _Zion_. The
Mediator’s kingdom makes glorious advances here. I cannot tell you the
hundredth part. I verily believe we shall see greater things abroad. I
know you pray that I may have a prosperous journey to you, by the will
of GOD. I expect to embark for _Georgia_ in a few months. In the mean
while, you shall not be forgotten by, dear Mr. _B――――_,

         Your most affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLVI.

                 _To Mrs. T――――, in South-Carolina._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 18, 1742._
  _My dear Friend_,

I Am glad to hear by your sister, that you are become a despised
follower of the lowly JESUS.――O glorious character! I am persuaded you
had rather have that title truly applied to you, than to be empress
of the universe. I long to see you, and to hear you tell what a happy
change you feel. How does dear Mr. _T――――_? Is he yet truly broken,
and going hand in hand with you to heaven? Happy pair!――I know, by
sweet experience, the comforts you enjoy. Death itself shall not part
you. I hope, nothing that has happened to dear Mr. _B――――_ will prove
a stumbling block to your soul. Such things must be glory to him, that
has said “all things shall work together for good.” My dear friends,
what a mystery is the christian life? Happy those, who are acquainted
with it. That it may be revealed more and more in your hearts, is the
earnest prayer of, dear friends,

    Your most affectionate friend, brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXLVII.

                        _To Mr. H―――― H――――._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 26, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

GLAD was I last night to receive a letter from your hands. I love your
simple honest heart, and earnestly pray the dear Redeemer to give you
a true, lasting, abiding rest in himself. Blessed be his name, I think
I can say, through free grace, that I am in a measure entered into it,
and know what it is by happy experience, to pass from glory to glory
every day. My dear brother, I am opposed on every side; the archers
shoot sore at me that I may fall, but the LORD is my helper. He causes
my bow to abide in strength, and makes me more than conqueror through
his love. The account sent with this, will shew you how often I
have been enabled to preach; but with what efficacy and success, pen
cannot describe. The glorious Redeemer seems to be advancing from
congregation to congregation, carrying all before him. The Messrs.
_E――――_’s people have kept a fast for me, and give out, that all
the work now in _Scotland_ is only delusion, and by the agency of
the devil. O, my dear brother, to what great lengths in bigotry and
prejudice may good men run? Blessed be GOD, I can see the differences
between GOD’s children, and yet love them from my heart. What you said
about poor _Wales_, affected me. I laid upon my face this day, and for
some time pleaded with groans unutterable, for direction in that, and
several other matters of great consequence. I fear my dear brother
thinks too highly of me. Indeed, I feel myself to be a poor sinner,
and yet I am rich in CHRIST, and lean upon his bosom from morning to
night; nay, all the night long. By his grace alone I am what I am;
and if he is pleased to honour me so far, I should be glad to help the
brethren in _Wales_. I am sorry to hear there has been such divisions.
But dividing times generally precede settling times. Upon the receipt
of your last, I wrote to Mr. _O――――_. Last night I received his
answer. He speaks very honourably of you, but thinks that you are too
censorious, in condemning a whole society for the faults of but some,
and too bigotted also to your own way. My dear brother will excuse
this. I would not deal so freely, or take such liberty, did I not
believe you would take it kindly. My brother, my soul loves you.
Dear Miss _Nancy_ wrote me word you was at my house, (I rejoiced) and
that you prayed heartily for unworthy me. The LORD reward, and fill
you with all joy and peace in believing! Our LORD is sovereign in
his dealing with his dear children. I walk in much liberty. O free
grace! Your being so exercised with inward conflicts, helps you to
search hypocrites. But glory be to our heavenly Father, there is a
glorious rest awaits us, and all the children of GOD. I think I feel
a foretaste of it now; nay, I believe I feel the thing itself in a
degree, and when I speak of it, I speak what I know. O infinitely
condescending GOD! My brother, my heart is full. The LORD JESUS bless
you, and fill your dear soul with all his fulness! So prays, with his
whole heart,

         Your most affectionate though most unworthy brother,
                    and willing servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXLVIII.

                     _To Mrs. L――――, in Bristol._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 26, 1742._
  _Honoured Mother_,

I Rejoice to hear that you have been so long under my roof. Blessed
be GOD, that I have a house for my honoured mother to come to. You are
heartily welcome to any thing my house affords, as long as you please.
I am of the same mind now, as formerly. If need was, indeed these
hands should administer to your necessities. I had rather want myself
than you should. I shall be highly pleased when I come to _Bristol_,
and find you sitting in your youngest son’s house. O that I may sit
with you, in the house not made with hands eternal in the heavens! Ere
long, your doom, honoured mother, will be fixed. You must shortly go
hence, and be no more seen. Your only daughter, I trust, is now in the
paradise of GOD. Methinks I hear her say, “Mother, come up hither.”
JESUS, I am sure, calls you in his word. May his spirit enable you to
say, “LORD, lo I come!” My honoured mother, I am happier and happier
every day. JESUS makes me exceeding happy in himself. I hope by Winter
to be at _Bristol_. If any enquire after me, please to tell them, I am
well both in body and soul, and desire them to help me to praise free
and sovereign grace. O that my dear, my very honoured mother may be
made an everlasting monument of it! How does my heart burn with love
and duty to you? gladly would I wash your aged feet, and lean upon
your neck, and weep and pray ’till I could pray no more. With this
I send you a thousand dutiful salutations, and ten thousand hearty
and most humble thanks for all the pains you underwent in conceiving,
bringing forth, nursing, and bringing up, honoured mother,

      Your most unworthy, though most dutiful son, ’till death,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXLIX.

                      _To Mr. A――――, in London._

                                        _Cambuslang, Aug. 27, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother A――――_,

THIS day fortnight I came to this place, to assist at the sacramental
occasion with several worthy ministers of the church of _Scotland_.
Such a passover has not been heard of. The voice of prayer and praise
was heard all night. It was supposed, that between 30 and 40,000
people were assembled, and 3000 communicated. There were three tents.
The ministers were enlarged, and great grace was among the people. I
preached once on _Saturday_, once on the LORD’s Day morning, served
five tables, and preached about ten at night to a great number in the
Church-yard. Though it rained much, there was a great awakening. On
_Monday_ at seven in the morning, the Reverend Mr. _Webster_ preached,
and there was a very great commotion, and also in the third sermon
when I preached, a very great and serious concern was visible through
the whole solemnity. The LORD’s people went home much refreshed. On
_Thursday_ I preached twice at _Greenock_; on _Friday_ three times at
_Kilbride_, and again on _Saturday_ once, and twice at _Stevenson_;
on _Sunday_ four times at _Irvine_. On _Monday_ once at _Irvine_, and
three times at _Kilmarnock_; on _Tuesday_ once at _Kilmarnock_, and
four times at _Stewarton_; on _Wednesday_ once at _Stewarton_, and
twice at the _Mearnes_; and yesterday twice at this place. I never
preached with so much apparent success before. At _Greenock_, _Irvine_,
_Kilbride_, _Kilmarnock_, and _Stewarton_, the concern was great:
at the three last very extraordinary. The work seems to spread more
and more. O, my friend, pray and give praise in behalf of the most
unworthy wretch that was ever employed in the dear Redeemer’s service.
I speak this from my inmost soul. I must cry out continually, “Why
me LORD, why me?” My dear brother _A――――_, I love you dearly in the
bowels of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. I think I could live with you always.
The LORD, I think, hath given you a meek and teachable disposition. O
what is it to be as little children! I am glad to find, you so hunger
and thirst after a continual abiding rest in GOD. Assure yourself,
the LORD will fill and satisfy your soul. He is faithful, who hath
promised, who also will do it. Wait, and thou shalt see and feel the
salvation of GOD. I think I have seen it more for some days past, than
in any journey before. Our Saviour loves to let us see yet greater
things. O for a large heart to receive all the fulness of GOD! I
rejoice to hear that the LORD is with you at the Tabernacle. May his
glory appear, and shine in it more and more! I believe it will: I
believe GOD will bless your school. Our LORD’s Disciples are generally
too much in a hurry; at least I am. They are not content to wait. “He
that believeth, doth not make haste.” O for a passive, tender, truly
broken, child-like heart! that we could watch in reality, and from
moment to moment hear the cry of every Christian, with every call from
GOD, whether by his providence or spirit. It is said, that GOD brought
and kept _Abraham_ at his feet. O that we were always there, waiting
for divine direction! Blessed be his name, I am for the most part at
the feet of JESUS, and indeed he graciously teaches me moment after
moment. I have many things before me now. I know brother _A――――_ will
help me by his prayers. Blessed be GOD, our heaven is begun here.

        Your truly affectionate brother and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCL.

                  _To Mr. S―――― C――――, in Deptford._

                                           _Glasgow, Sept. 2, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother C――――_,

I Am just now come from the pulpit, wherein I have experienced much of
the Redeemer’s power, and seen his stately outgoings in the sanctuary.
My brother, the cry of my heart is, “and will GOD indeed dwell with
such a wretch as I am.” Methinks a voice echo’s from above, “I have
dwelt in thee, I do dwell in thee, I will dwell in thee for evermore.”
My heart replies, “LORD, I believe and worship.”

             _A heart that no desire can move,
              But still to adore, believe, and love._

This, my dear brother, is the present, and indeed continual bent of my
soul, which I trust prospers. I feel myself to grow more poor inwardly;
I see, I am but a learner in the school of CHRIST, and my dear Master
teaches me new lessons every day. About a week ago, I think he did
more for me than ever I saw before. Glory be to GOD, that he is so
much with you at _London_. I rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. I am
amazed when I hear, as I do almost every day, of some fresh persons
wrought upon by my unworthy ministry. This humbles me very much, and
brings me very low at the feet of the ever-loving JESUS. I dare not
deny that I am one of his chosen; but I am jealous for myself and for
those about me, lest we should grieve the holy Spirit, and oblige him
to withdraw for our ingratitude, unfruitfulness, pride, selfishness,
and insensibility of the blessings we enjoy. Last night I went to
sleep quite angry, but chiefly with myself.――I saw that I had received
much, and did so little for my GOD, and CHRIST, that I could feelingly
smite upon my breast, lay my head upon my pillow, and close my eyes
with these words, “GOD be merciful to me a sinner?” And to-day, what
have I seen and felt, yea what do I now feel? My soul is swallowed
up in GOD. His presence is filling my soul, and renewing my bodily
strength. Here is free grace, my dear brother. Was you here, I think
I could now warm your heart with a lecture upon the unparalleled love
of JESUS; but time is short: blessed be GOD, an eternity is before me,
but “eternity too short to utter all his praise.” I think I love you
and yours unfeignedly, and rejoice that you enjoy sweet fellowship
together. Glory be to GOD, that you have gotten many living stones.
Trust the great Redeemer, the all-wise contriver and perfecter of his
spiritual temple, to put them together. I have been faulty in looking
too much to foreign help, and despising that which GOD had given me.
When our LORD was to feed the multitude, he would not create new bread,
but multiplied the loaves that were already at hand. “Ye need not send
them away, give ye them to eat,” said he: so say I to my dear brethren
at the tabernacle. “Work with the materials you have.” In doing the
work, GOD will teach you how to do it.――Experience will grow up with
the work itself. Thus GOD hath dealt with me, and so he continues to
deal. May his blessed spirit guide you all into all truth, and give
you a right judgment in all things! I love to see the little child in
others, though I see so little of it in my unworthy self. But I must
not exceed; other business demands my attention. Write to me often
about the state of the church. Mr. _E――――_’s people rather run greater
and greater lengths in misguided zeal. Our love to all. I intreat a
continuance of your prayers, because the archers are shooting from
every quarter at, dear brother _C――――_,

                Your poor weak brother in the kingdom
                    and patience of JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCLI.

                    _To Brother T――――, in London._

                                       _Glasgow, September 4, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

I Hope this letter will find you, where your last left you, at the
feet of the meek and lowly JESUS. My dear brother, it is a delightful
situation: _Mary_ found it so. O true poverty of spirit, what a rare,
yet what a precious thing it is! The foundation of it, is a deep,
abiding knowledge of the corruption of the heart, and its desperate
wickedness. I find more and more the necessity of leaning upon my
beloved, whilst travelling through the wilderness of this world.
I find I am yet but learning in the school of CHRIST, and scarce
know any thing as I ought to know. I often blush at a sense of my
unfruitfulness, ingratitude, &c. and yet am made continually to
rejoice in his great salvation. My brother, press on and faint not;
though faint, yet still pursue. When your father and mother forsake
you, the LORD will take you up. I do not wonder at your father’s
opposition. His letter bespeaks him to be a man of a very bad spirit.
I thought proper to burn it. My brother, pray for him, and beg of
JESUS that you may behave with all meekness, humility and love.
I would enlarge, but time is short, and much of my dear Master’s
business is lying before me. For the present, adieu! My kind love
to all. May the LORD keep you unspotted from the world. You shall
overcome by the blood of the Lamb. We see wond’rous things here. Pray
and give thanks for

           Your affectionate friend, and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLII.

                      _To Mr. B――――, in London._

                                           _Glasgow, Sept. 4, 1742._
  _My dear Brother B――――_,

I Embrace a few moments to answer your kind letter. Not want of love
but leisure prevented my doing it before; yet I have not forgotten you
in my prayers. Your case hath been upon my heart. I pray GOD you may
be enabled, at this time especially, to plead the promise of temporal
blessings. Remember, my dear brother, you can call GOD, your GOD
and Father: if so, your GOD will supply all your wants. These words
were so pressed upon my soul once when in extremity, that I hope
I shall never forget them: “Be careful for nothing, but by prayer
and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto GOD.” I have for these eight or nine years past, had no visible
settled fund, but fetched in all temporal supplies by pleading the
promises. My GOD never failed me, he never will. This morning I have
been lecturing upon _Elisha_’s multiplying the widow’s oil. The LORD
GOD of _Elisha_ is yet living. O that you may have faith to apply to
him. O that you may be willing to be made poor. My brother, I find
freedom in writing to you. Blessed be GOD, who hath made any thing
that I have spoken of use to your soul. Tell your wife, she must take
my advice, and pray with you. She sins, I think, in omitting it. I
rejoice to hear that the LORD is with you at the tabernacle. May he be
with you more and more! My brother, GOD is doing wonders here indeed.
Every day he shews us great things. Yesterday, and the day before,
how did he display his power? I am lost when I think of it. O that GOD
should ever dwell with such an ill and hell-deserving wretch as I am!
Amazing! Thy mercies, O GOD, they humble me. Adieu.

          Your unworthy and affectionate friend and brother,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLIII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― N――――._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 13, 1742._
  _My very dear brother N――――_,

I Have just been writing to our dear brother _G―――― T――――_, and now
sit down to write to you. Both your letters came to me at the same
time, and had I not been used to trials of that nature, would have
affected me much. Dear Mr. _T――――_ speaks many things, that I know are
too true of the _Moravian Brethren_; but his spirit seems to be too
much heated, and I fear some of his own wild-fire is mixed with that
sacred fire of zeal, which comes from GOD. My dear brother, I want to
be more like unto GOD, who sees and corrects all things that are amiss,
and yet continues unmoved in his own nature. I want to be more like
unto JESUS, GOD blessed for evermore! who sees all the quarrels and
heart-risings of his children one amongst another, and yet bears with,
and loves them still. My heart doth not reproach me, for my kindness
and friendship with those that differ from me. I think I have been
led by the word and spirit of GOD into this part of my conduct; but
I confess that I am jealous, and trust with a godly jealousy, over
many who talk and write of the Lamb, and who mimic some particular
persons in their outward way of behaviour, but yet are not truly poor
in spirit. They act too much like me, who at my first setting out
imitated the outward shew of humility in Monsieur _Dezenly_, before I
got true simplicity of heart. Indeed, I have too little of it now. But,
blessed be GOD by his free grace, I am what I am. I think I can say I
am made unfeignedly happy in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and can discover
in some measure between a false and disguised holiness. Glory be to
the Redeemer’s name, I walk in light and liberty, and am enabled to
rejoice in the LORD always. Though I can say to corruption, “Thou
art my sister,” yet I can with a full assurance of faith at all times
say, “GOD is my father, and all is mine, because I am CHRIST’s.” My
dear, very dear host and brother, I pray GOD that you and I may more
experience the glorious liberty of the children of GOD: a liberty
not from the in-being, but from the reigning power and dominion of
sin. JESUS came to make us kings, as well as priests, and it is our
privilege to reign upon the earth. We that believe, do enter into rest.
Faith is of an all-conquering nature, and causes us to trample sin,
death, and hell under our feet. My dear brother, I experience more,
unspeakably more of the Redeemer’s power, than when I saw you last.
My happiness increases daily, and I am persuaded will increase, ’till
grace is swallowed up in glory. My principles as to the fundamentals
of the gospel are just the same as yours. I cannot renounce those
precious truths, that I have felt the power of, and which were taught
me not of man but of GOD. At the same time, I would love all that love
JESUS, though they differ from me in some points. The angels love all
the true worshippers of JESUS every where, and why should not we? If
our brethren will quarrel with us, let us not quarrel with them. O my
dear brother, I pray our dear Redeemer to give you meekness to those,
who may not see so far as you do. I entreat you, my dear brother, to
overcome their evil with your good. Zeal for GOD may excite others
to oppose you, as well as you to oppose them; therefore bear with
and love them. This will shew you to be a disciple indeed, and to
have that mind, which was in CHRIST JESUS. O that we grew up into
his divine likeness, and were indeed conformed to our great Exemplar!
How truly simple and void of guilt should we be! Our brother, I fear,
has not dealt uprightly with me. At first he called me a servant of
GOD, and then a blasphemer and deceiver, and said, I should be in a
miserable condition. Pray tell _P――――_ of it, and acquaint him at the
same time, that I grow happier and happier in the Lamb every day, and
more and more honoured by the great Head and King of the Church. O
simplicity! whether art thou fled?――In a short time I hope to embark
for _Georgia_, and then, GOD willing, I shall see you face to face.
Wonderful things have been doing here; things unspeakable and full
of glory. The confusions abroad are no greater than what I expected
to hear of. Just such a scene hath been at home; but the glorious
_Emmanuel_ will over-rule all for good. Why have you not written to my
poor family in _Georgia_? I am persuaded great things will come from
the orphan-house. O remember, my dear brother, to exercise catholic
love in all its branches. I love and long much to see you. I shall
write, GOD willing, to Mr. _W――――_. I find his spirit is also
imbittered. May the LORD sweeten all your hearts! With hearty thanks
for all favours, I am, my very dear brother,

           Most affectionately yours in the glorious JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLIV.

                   _To Mr. E――――, in Philadelphia._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 14, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

YOUR kind letter came to hand a few days ago, and I rejoice to hear
that you are now happy. I wish you may be really settled and rooted
and grounded in love, and no longer so tossed about as you have
been in times past. I find many talk and boast of rest, of which I
fear they have not yet got a feeling possession. There is as much
difference between these two, as between a shadow and the substance.
Far be it from me, to think thus of you, my dear brother. No, I
believe our Saviour has really loved and washed you in his blood,
and redeemed you unto GOD, that you might be a king and priest, and
reign upon the earth. There is plenteous redemption in the blood of
JESUS. He came, not only that we might have life, but that we might
have it more abundantly. He that believeth on JESUS, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water. They that believe enter into rest.
O glorious redemption! O glorious liberty of the children of GOD!
Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed; they,
who having not seen, yet have loved JESUS, and do rejoice with joy
unspeakable, even with joy that is full of glory. Blessed be GOD, that
you feel more of this than you did a twelvemonth ago. In a year’s time,
you will be ashamed to think what a dwarf you are now. A believer is
to pass from glory to glory. It is ignorance and pride that makes us
think we have already attained. The more we are acquainted with JESUS,
the more we shall be acquainted with our own hearts, and grow more
truly poor in spirit every day. Indeed, my dear brother, I am a
thousand times happier than when you saw me. JESUS hath saved me from
many corruptions, and is every day transforming me more and more into
his own likeness. I cannot rest, unless I feel a sensible growth in
my soul, and find that I get more of the true artless simplicity that
was in JESUS. Blessed be GOD for that fulness which is in CHRIST, out
of which we are all to receive grace for grace. Many, many souls have
lately been drawing out of this fulness. I am amazed at his love to
me! O free grace! O sovereign, distinguishing, unmerited love!――I
think you did well in receiving some particular persons into your
house. “Be not forgetful to entertain strangers,” says the Apostle. I
cannot think it is right, to be so far carried away with an orthodox
scheme, as to neglect acts of love to the members of CHRIST’s body.
Give me leave, my dear brother, to behave with all meekness toward
those, who may not be so well affected toward such whom you love. If
you do not take care, and keep close to the blessed JESUS, your spirit
may be imbittered, and you may yet insensibly sink into bigotry. Some
of our _English_ friends, I am sure, have done so. It is a blessed
thing to be kept free. JESUS can do this for you, my dear brother, and
I am persuaded he will. In the love of a crucified JESUS,

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCLV.

                    _To Mr. M――――, at Cambuslang._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 15, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Brother_,

YOUR kind letter I received this morning. I wonder you can love me,
for I feel myself more unworthy every day; and yet, dear Sir, the
King of Kings still delights to honour me. At _Cumbernauld_, and
_Torphichen_, the LORD was with me. I was much led to discourse upon
walking with GOD, and had a sweet opening upon those words, “And
_Enoch_ walked with GOD, &c.” Since I have been at _Edinburgh_, the
LORD has much blessed me, and given me some fresh teachings from his
blessed spirit. I believe hundreds are fed day by day. O dear Sir,
help me to adore free grace. May GOD reward you for all kindnesses
shewn to me and mine! Indeed, dear Sir, I have scarce patience with
myself. I can do so little in the day for GOD, that when I go to bed
at night, I am quite ashamed. I trust I shall begin to do something
now. Dear Sir, help me, help me by your prayers, that I may stir up
the gift of GOD that is in me. I shall not easily forget you; fear
not, the LORD will yet be with you. I have sent to Messrs. _O――――_
and _L――――_. I fear I cannot reach either of their places; but, GOD
willing, I purpose to come home once more to _Cambuslang_, and then
must take a long, long farewel. Blessed be GOD, we shall meet by
and by, never to part any more. Then, dear Sir, our warfare will be
accomplished, and the archers will shoot at us no more. My soul glows
with love whilst I am writing. Sometimes I am enabled to look within
the veil, and to take a view of the promised land. I am nothing, but
CHRIST is my all. For the present, adieu! Dear Sir, adieu! My love to
_Robert_, surnamed _Nathaniel_. All with me dearly love him. O join
with him in praying, and giving thanks for us, especially, dear Mr.
_M――――_, for

              Your weak, unworthy, though happy brother
                     and servant in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLVI.

                   _To Mr. F――――, in Pensylvania._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 22, 1742._
  _My dear Brother F――――_,

I Received your two kind letters, dated _June_ the 1st and 6th, and
can only say, CHRIST is king in _Zion_, and orders all things well.
I think you cannot have a scene of greater confusion among you, than
there has been in _England_. But blessed be GOD, matters are brought
to a better issue, and though we cannot agree in principles, yet we
agree in love, Tho’, as you know, I am clear in the truths of the
gospel, yet I find that principles of themselves, without the spirit
of GOD, will not unite any set of men whatever; and where the spirit
of GOD is in any great degree, there will be union of heart, though
there may be difference in sentiments. This I have learnt, my dear
brother, by happy experience, and find great freedom and peace in my
soul thereby. This makes me to love many, though I cannot agree with
them in some of their principles. I dare not look upon them as wilful
deceivers, but as persons who hazard their lives for the sake of the
gospel.――Mr. _W――――_ I think is wrong in somethings, and Mr. _L――――_
wrong also; yet I believe that both Mr. _L――――_ and Mr. _W――――_, and
others, with whom we do not agree in all things, will shine bright
in glory. It is best therefore for a gospel-minister, simply and
powerfully to preach those truths he has been taught of GOD, and
to meddle as little as possible with those who are children of GOD,
though they should differ in many things. This would keep the heart
sweet, and at the same time not betray the truths of JESUS. I have
tried both the disputing, and the quiet way, and find the latter
far preferable to the former. I have not given way to the _Moravian_
Brethren, or Mr. _W――y_, or to any, whom I thought in an error, no
not for an hour. But I think it best not to dispute, when there is
no probability of convincing. I pray you, for CHRIST’s sake, to take
heed lest your spirit should be imbittered, when you are speaking or
writing for GOD. This will give your adversaries advantage over you,
and make people think your passion is the effect of your principles.
Since I have been in _England_ this time, _Calvin_’s example has been
very much pressed upon me. You know how _Luther_ abused him. As we
are of _Calvinistical_ principles, I trust we shall in this respect
imitate _Calvin_’s practice, and shew all meekness to those who may
oppose. My dear brother, you will not be offended at my using this
freedom. I am a poor creature, unworthy to advise you; but I simply
tell you a little of my own experience. May the LORD give you, and all
that stand up for the doctrines of the gospel, a right judgment in all
things! For JESUS CHRIST’s sake, as much as in you lies, put a stop
to disputing. It imbitters the spirit, ruffles the soul, and hinders
it from hearing the small still voice of the Holy Ghost. May you be
filled with all joy and peace in believing! GOD has been very gracious
to me here. Wonderful things have been done in _Scotland_. When I
shall come to you, I cannot as yet determine. I hope to embark in a
few months. In the mean time, be pleased to remember me to all that
love the glorious _Emmanuel_, and accept this in tenderest love from,
my very dear brother,

   Your most affectionate though most unworthy brother and servant
                in the kingdom and patience of JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLVII.

                           _To Mr. H――――._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 24, 1742._
  _My most endeared Friend and Brother_,

YOUR short letter, dated _July_ the 14th, I received two days ago,
to my great satisfaction. I am glad my dear family is removed to Mr.
_B――――_, and rejoice, that our glorious GOD had raised him and his
brother up, to be such friends in time of need. Our all-wise Saviour
saw this, and therefore sent them to be converted at the Orphan-house.
O LORD, thou art fearful in praises, glorious in holiness, doing
wonders! I trust this will find you, my dear friends, and my dear
lambs, happily settled at _Bethesda_. I cannot think, GOD will give
you over into the enemies hands, or that he will suffer the enemy to
abide in _Georgia_ for any considerable time. My thoughts have been
variously exercised, but my heart kept stedfast and joyful in the
LORD of all Lords, whose mercy endureth for ever. The kings taking
_Lot_, and _Abraham_ recovering him out of their hands, hath been much
pressed upon my heart. _Abraham_’s going into the land of _Canaan_,
and being driven out by a grievous famine soon after he came there,
has also been applied to my soul. And those words of _Moses_, “These
enemies which you see, you shall see them no more,” have fallen with
great warmth, and wait upon me. These things put together, keep my
mind humbly depending upon GOD, in a full assurance that some great
and good event for the kingdom of JESUS will ere long be brought about.
I am supported in a peculiar manner, and kept from staggering through
unbelief.――With this, I send you a continuation of the Orphan-house
account, which I printed to satisfy the public, and to promote future
collections. The news about the _Spaniards_, perhaps may strike a damp
upon the collection at this time; but even this shall work for good.
GOD has a wheel within a wheel. O, my dear brother, how do I long
to be with you! You need not say, “if possible now come over,” for I
have long wished for the wings of a dove to fly to _Georgia_. I yet
owe upwards of two hundred and fifty pounds in _England_, upon the
Orphan-house account, and have nothing towards it. How is the world
mistaken about my circumstances: worth nothing myself, embarrassed for
others, and yet looked upon to flow in riches? Our extremity is GOD’s
opportunity. O faith, thou hast an all-conquering power! Surely, my
dear man, you and the rest of you will grow now in this time of trial.
Fear not, neither be dismayed: the LORD your GOD will fight for you.
I put my trust in him, and through his mercy I shall not miscarry. He
still strengthens me to go on from conquering to conquer. I pray for
you, I think and dream of you almost continually. I long, I long to
be with you, and methinks could willingly be found at the head of you
kneeling and praying, though a _Spaniard_’s sword should be put to my
throat. But alas! I know not how I should behave, if put to the trial:
only we have a promise, “that as our day is, so our strength shall
be.” I would gladly write to you all, but being so variously employed,
having the superintendency of so many souls and so many spiritual
affairs, in many different places, I feel a little of what St. _Paul_
says, when he wrote these words, “besides that which cometh upon me
daily, the care of all the churches.” What am I? LORD, I adore and
worship! I hope ere now you have had letters from brother _G――――_ and
_Philadelphia_ friends. Some there, are suspicious that I am joined
with the _Moravian_ Brethren, but indeed I am not. My principles are
still the same; only as I believe many of them love the LORD JESUS, I
would love and be friendly to them, as I would be to all others, who
I think bear the image of our common Master, notwithstanding some
of my principles differ from theirs, and are as far distant as the
East is from the West. Glory be to GOD, for keeping me stedfast
to those truths, which himself and not man hath taught me. I feel
the power of them more and more every day, and am continually made
happier and happier in the righteousness of the glorious Redeemer.
O free, sovereign, distinguishing, electing, everlasting, infinitely
condescending love! it quite amazes me. The thoughts of this love
carry me above every thing. My dear friend, the _Spaniards_ cannot
rob us of this, nor can men, or devils. It is immutable and eternal as
GOD himself. May the meditation on this, lead us nearer and nearer to
GOD in CHRIST, that we may every day, every hour, every moment be more
and more conformed to his blessed image, and ripen more and more for
eternal glory. But I must have done. Adieu! my dear man, adieu! I am
ready to weep tears of love. Humbly hoping, that I shall shortly hear
of the spiritual and temporal welfare of you all, I subscribe myself,
with the utmost sincerity and affection,

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLVIII.

               _To the Reverend Dr. C――――, in Boston._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 24, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

TO my great and abundant satisfaction, I received your long wished for
letter of _June 3_. It was late at night ere it came to hand; but I
could not go to rest without reading it. I read, and rejoiced, and
prayed for the writer with my whole heart. O reverend and dear Sir,
GOD only knows how closely I am knit to the dear ministers and people
of _New-England_. They are ever upon my heart, and it rejoiced me to
find I was not forgotten (unworthy as I am) by them. Dear Sir, I am
glad to hear that the work still goes on; be not surprized, if you
are forsaken. _Paul_ was served so, and when I came to _England_ most
of my old friends and spiritual children were exceedingly prejudiced
against me. Our great high-priest sees these trials to be necessary
for us, to try our faith, and teach us to cease from man. I hope they
have produced this blessed effect in some measure upon my soul. There
seems to be such a scene in _Philadelphia_, as we have had in old
_England_. I have wrote to Mr. _T――――_. He in a late letter thinks me
too charitable; but my conscience doth not reproach me for that. My
principles are still the same. I embrace the calvinistical scheme,
not because _Calvin_, but JESUS CHRIST, I think, has taught it to me.
I go on preaching the cross and power of the Redeemer, and desire to
say as little as possible about others, lest thereby I should divert
people’s minds from the simplicity of the gospel. I have often found
that opposing, instead of hurting, makes erroneous people become more
considerable. This made me wish, that the _Boston_ ministers would not
take up so much time in speaking against the Exhorters. It will only
set the people the more upon following after them; but I cannot well
judge at such a distance, and indeed I find I am such a poor creature,
that I scarce know any thing yet, as I ought to know. At the same time,
I will not deny what I have received; no, this would be dishonouring
my dear Saviour. He makes me daily more and more happy in himself, and
I continually rejoice in his great salvation. At present he supports
me in an uncommon manner, and the news of the _Spaniards_ attacking
_Georgia_ affects me no otherwise, than to increase my faith and
confidence in him, whom I am sure careth for me and mine. O dear
Sir, what a glorious thing is divine faith! May you have much of
it, and feel the power of it more and more every day! With repeated
salutations and returns of love, I once more subscribe myself,
reverend and dear Sir,

     Your most affectionate friend, younger brother, and servant
          in the glorious gospel of the ever blessed JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLIX.

              _To Jonathan B――――, Esq., in New-England._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 25, 1742._
  _Honoured Sir_,

I Rejoiced to hear by the reverend and dear Dr. _C――――_, that you are
retired from the world, full of piety and devotion. I congratulate you,
honoured Sir, upon your happy change, and pray that you may be filled
with all the fulness of GOD. Exceedingly engaged as I am, I could
not but send a line to you, because I love you in the bowels of JESUS
CHRIST. I remember your command; I have you upon my heart, and pray
the glorious _Emmanuel_ to do more abundantly for you and yours, than
you are able to ask or think. It is impossible to tell you what the
LORD hath done for unworthy me. Honoured Sir, I feel a bliss I cannot
express. My happiness in JESUS increases daily. I am only ashamed
of my unfruitfulness, and the little I do for GOD. Indeed, honoured
Sir, I could wish for a thousand lives. My JESUS should have them all.
Methinks I hear you say, “thus it is with me.” Hail then happy man!
All generations shall call you blessed. Honoured Sir, my soul is full
in the midst of many trials. O what a glorious redemption hath JESUS
purchased for us! Indeed it is a plenteous redemption. By the power
of his death we are enabled to tread sin, death, and satan under our
feet. This is the present frame of my soul. O free grace! unsearchable
riches! The brightness of it dazzles the eyes of my faith. LORD, I
adore and worship in the temple of my heart! Honoured Sir, be pleased
to accept these few lines from a heart overflowing with love to GOD,
and for his great name sake to you. With most humble respects, and
affectionate returns of gratitude for all favours, I beg leave to
subscribe myself, honoured Sir,

                  Your most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCLX.

                   _To Mr. E――――, in Philadelphia._

                                        _Edinburgh, Sept. 25, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother E――――_,

SINCE I wrote last, your other kind letter, dated _July 24_, came
to hand, by which I find matters at _Philadelphia_ are much the same
as when you wrote before. I pray GOD to give me wisdom, and a right
understanding, to judge of those different jarring accounts that
are sent me. As far as I am able to determine, I think some who have
the truths of GOD on their side, defend themselves with too great a
mixture of their own spirit, and by this means perhaps some persons
may be prejudiced even against truth itself. This is one rock, I pray
GOD, my dear brother, to keep your soul from splitting against. Again,
I think the _M――――n_ Brethren shew a better and milder spirit in the
general; but many of their principles deviate as far from the truths
of JESUS CHRIST, as the east is from the west, or the north from the
south. I wish you may not have gone a step too far. It was unjust
for Mr. _B――――_’s brother to be denied preaching in the new building.
Shall I commend Mr. _B――――_ for this? I commend him not. The brethren
should have some other place to preach in, and not make that house a
Babel. I cannot give up truth for them, or for any other under heaven.
I find they are as weak and fallible as those whom they judge not to
have drank so deeply of the spirit of CHRIST; and therefore, my dear
man, though we love all, we must be upon our guard, and follow not
man’s teaching, but the teaching of the Holy Ghost. Though principles
are not to be rested in, yet it is a good thing to have a clear head
as well as a clean heart. Some people make nothing of principles; but
why are they so zealous in propagating their own? I think, my dear
brother, I am a happy sinner, and have really entered into an abiding
rest in GOD, through the LORD JESUS CHRIST; but yet the stirrings of
corruption I expect in some degree or other, till I breathe my last.
This I hope is all that dear Mr. _T――――_ insists on. My dear brother,
love the brotherhood, but do not give up the truths of GOD; and when
you are brought off from idolizing one creature, take care you do not
insensibly fall into idolizing another. Do not think that all things
the most refined christian in the world does, is right; or that all
principles are wrong, because some that hold them are too imbittered
in their spirits. It is hard for good men, when the truths of GOD are
opposed, to keep their temper, especially at the first attack. Nothing
but the all-conquering blood of the dear Redeemer can destroy the
wild-fire in the heart. You will see what I have wrote to the dear
Trustees. I hope our loving Saviour will incline you to comply with my
advice. I believe it is from him, and will much tend to the prosperity
of Zion. That, I trust, we have all at heart. I pray GOD we may be
enabled so to act, as to do nothing to obstruct it, but bear and
forbear with one another in love, and give way in some things to
promote the common good. You see, my dear man, how freely I write
to you. It is out of the fulness of my heart. I hope you and I shall
be happily surprized, in finding each other better than we expected.
GOD forbid that we should live one hour without growing more like the
blessed Lamb of GOD. I am too credibly informed, that some make it
their business to prejudice my friends against me. Such wisdom cometh
not from above. They are as the false apostles, of whom Saint _Paul_
spoke, “They would exclude us, that you might affect them.” But glory
be to free grace! I can repose myself in JESUS, and am happy in him.
However I may be dealt with by man, blessed be his name, I am now
happy in the midst of various trials, even beyond expression. I only
add, through grace I have laid the foundation; let others beware how
they build thereon. Adieu, my dear brother. I am, with cordial
respects and affection,

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXI.

             _To the Reverend Mr. E―――― J――――, in Wales._

                                          _Edinburgh, Oct. 6, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

YESTERDAY your kind and profitable letter came to hand. My dear wife
being embarked, I opened, read, and now snatch a few moments to answer
it. I took your hints upon _Jacob_’s ladder, and preached upon it
with freedom yesterday in the afternoon. I trust some will be induced
to begin to climb, and others be stirred to climb faster; at least I
shall myself for one, for indeed I am ashamed I have mounted no higher
yet. Blessed be GOD, I am ascended so far as to have the world almost
out of my sight, and I see my dear master standing at the top reaching
out his hand, ready to receive me up into heaven. Indeed, my dear
brother, the LORD hath dealt most bountifully with me; he gives me to
rejoice in all his dispensations towards me. It well becometh GOD’s
children to give thanks for all things that befal them, since it is
GOD ’s will concerning them. I am taught more and more every day to
live by faith in the Son of GOD, who loved and gave himself for me.
GOD keeps me, and brings me where I would desire to be, at his feet,
waiting his will, and watching the motions of his blessed spirit,
word, and providence. Here I find safety and refuge amidst the various
storms of opposition and reproach which I daily meet with. GOD is on
my side, I will not fear what men nor devils can say of, or do unto me.
The dear Messrs. _E――――s_ have dressed me in very black colours.――Mr.
_G――――_’s pamphlet will shew you how black. Dear men, I pity them.
Writing I fear will be in vain. Surely they must grieve the holy
spirit much. O for a mind divested of all sects and names and parties!
I think it is my one simple aim to promote the kingdom of JESUS,
without partiality and without hypocrisy, indefinitely amongst all.
I care not if the name of _George Whitefield_ be banished out of the
world, so that JESUS be exalted in it. Glory be to his great name, we
have seen much of his power and greatness in _Scotland_. The work in
the west still goes on and increases. Last sabbath-day, and _Monday_,
very great things, greater than ever, were seen at _Kilsyth_. There
is a great awakening also at _Muthel_, and many living stones building
up in _Edinburgh_. I preach twice every day with great power, and
walk in liberty and love. At the same time I see and feel my vileness,
and take the blessed JESUS to be my righteousness and all. I purpose,
GOD willing, to go through _Newcastle_ and _Yorkshire_ to _England_.
_Ireland_ I believe must be left till another circuit. In about three
weeks, I purpose, GOD willing, to leave _Scotland_, and hope to spend
a month ere long in _Wales_. My dear and honoured brother, I hope the
LORD will give you an heart to pray for me, for indeed I am a very
poor sinner, and many are waiting for my halting; but JESUS is able
and willing to make me stand. I have been much strengthened, since
the _Spaniards_ have invaded _Georgia_. I think I am like the ark
surrounded on all sides with waves, but through free rich grace am
enabled to swim above all. Ere long, I shall rest on mount _Zion_ in
the arms of my beloved JESUS. Here is love would make me drop a tear,
and set my pen a writing quicker, but other business calls for me.
Dear Sir, be pleased to pray for me, and remember me to your dear
wife, and all the followers of the Lamb. Pray write to Mr. _McC――――_
immediately, and send as often as you can, dear Mr. _J――――_, to

   Your weak, unworthy, but truly affectionate brother and servant,
                in the kingdom and patience of JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXII.

                         _To Colonel G――――._

                                       _Edinburgh, October 7, 1742._
  _Honoured Sir_,

THOUGH I never had the pleasure of seeing you, yet I have often prayed
for you, and can assure you I love you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST.
I hope you will not be offended with me, for troubling you with
this. Your honoured lady tells me, you will not. Love, I am persuaded,
inclines me to write, and I doubt not but you will receive it in the
same spirit. Dear Sir, I rejoice to hear that you are a good soldier
of JESUS CHRIST, and that you delight to fight the Redeemer’s battles.
May you be covered with all his armours and filled with all his
fulness! I have the pleasure often to go without the camp, and to bear
a little of his sacred reproach, and I prefer it to all the treasures
in the world. Weak as I am, my JESUS makes me more than conqueror
through his love. He has brought mighty things to pass here, and
gotten himself the victory in many hearts. I trust, there is not a
day passes but some poor creature or another is plucked as a brand out
of the burning. I wish I could hear GOD was more in the camp. Blessed
be his name for raising you up, honoured Sir, to lift a standard
for him. May you be endued with the meekness of _Moses_, the courage
of _Joshua_, the zeal of _Paul_, and a large portion of the blessed
spirit of CHRIST! I hope, honoured Sir, you will now and then remember
me a poor sinner, and speak a word for me to the King of kings and
LORD of lords, that I may not turn my head in the day of battle, but
rather die for, than deny him in any wise. Neither you nor yours are
forgotten by me. Indeed I am a poor creature, but happy, very happy in
the once crucified, but now exalted JESUS. For his sake, and in his
great name, I beg leave to subscribe myself, honoured Sir,

                Your affectionate humble servant, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXIII.

                 _To the Reverend Mr. J―――― W――――._

                                      _Edinburgh, October 11, 1742._
  _Reverend and dear Sir_,

ABOUT ten days ago, I sent you a packet by my dear wife, which I hope
you will have received ere this comes to hand. Yesterday morning I
had your kind letter dated _October 5_. In answer to the first part
of it, I say, “Let old things pass away, and all things become new.”
I can heartily say, “Amen” to the latter part of it. “Let the king
live for ever, and controversy die.” It has died with me long ago. I
shall be glad to see the extract of your journal. Be pleased to send
it immediately, under cover, to Mr. _E――――_, member of parliament in
_Edinburgh_. I shall not leave _Scotland_ in less than three weeks.
Before yours came, I had engaged to go through _Newcastle_ in my
way to _London_. I rejoice to hear the LORD has blessed your dear
brother’s labours. I am enabled to preach twice daily with great power,
and find I walk in light and liberty continually. Like the ark, I am
surrounded on all sides, but enabled to swim triumphantly over all. O
free grace! I thank you, dear Sir, for praying for me, and thank our
common LORD for putting it in your heart so to do. I have been upon my
knees praying for you and yours. O that nothing but love, lowliness,
and simplicity may be among us. It grieves me to see what a sad spirit
prevails among Mr. _E――――_’s people. Father, forgive them! I trust
you will remember my poor orphans. GOD gives me strong faith for them,
though no news yet of the _Spaniards_ leaving _Georgia_. Yesterday
morning a dear little hospital girl went off in triumph. The work
is still increasing in _Scotland_, especially at _Kilsyth_. Surely
we shall see great things ere long. Dear friend, my soul is on fire.
O let us not fall out in the way! Let us bear with, and forbear one
another in love. GOD be praised for giving you such a mind. My kind
love to all that love the LORD JESUS in sincerity. In much haste, and
with great thanks for your last letter, I subscribe myself, reverend
and very dear Sir,

    Your most affectionate, though younger brother, in the gospel
                     of our glorious _Emmanuel_,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXIV.

               _To Mrs. Ann D――――, in Huntingdonshire._

                                      _Edinburgh, October 13, 1742._
  _My very dear Sister_,

WITH great pleasure I received your kind letters. They increased that
love, which I had before to the writer of them. I redeem a few moments
to return you an answer to them, and am ashamed to think how I put
you off; but I see you consider my circumstances, and love to our dear
JESUS inclines you to excuse me. Blessed be GOD, I can still send you
an account of the increase of _Emmanuel_’s kingdom. I preach always
twice, sometimes three or four times in a day. The people are more
eager than ever, and much solid work is done for GOD. My strength
is daily renewed. Still I desire to cry, grace! grace! I am fondled
exceedingly, I scarce have any damp. My soul continually magnifies the
LORD, and my spirit rejoices in GOD my Saviour. I know you will help
me to praise him. I collected last week 128 _l._ for my poor orphans.
I have sent you an account of them. You will continue writing to, and
praying for my dear family. I hope to see you before I embark. By this,
you will receive a line from one Mr. _R――――_, an humble walker with
GOD, and Mr. _T――――_, a bookseller, who I believe loves the LORD
JESUS in sincerity. Pray answer them. I would have your correspondence
enlarged, and therefore I set other people writing to you, though I
cannot write so much myself. My dear sister, adieu. The LORD be with
you, and yours. I am now in a lady’s family, whom GOD has blessed.――We
have several such here. With great sincerity and affection, I
subscribe myself,

                    Ever yours, in yours and mine,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXV.

                    _To Mr. T――――, in Edinburgh._

                                        _Glasgow, October 20, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. T――――_,

YOUR letter much refreshed me. Thanks be to GOD, for putting it
into your heart to write to unworthy me. The blessed JESUS hath been
the author of our friendship, and therefore it will be blessed. I
rejoice much, that the LORD is with you and your ministers. May you
all increase with all the increase of GOD! O that the societies may
remember to pray and give thanks on my behalf. Dear Mr. _T――――_, what
deliverances hath the LORD wrought for me? Before the news came of the
_Spaniards_ leaving _Georgia_, the words came to my mind, that were
pressed on me in the park with great power: “These enemies which you
have now seen, you shall see no more.” What a life is a life of faith?
I know I am reckoned enthusiastic, even by many christian friends,
in respect to my Orphan-house; but “he that believeth, doth not make
haste.” I find we must be tried by friends, as well as by foes. All is
intended to bring us nearer to the friend of all. I hope I improved my
interest in him just now, for you and yours, and for all _Edinburgh_
friends. As soon as we had perused the letters, we kneeled down, and
prayed, and gave thanks. Good news came from _London_, I hope, next
post, to hear that our dear friends have got safe thither. O what
reason have I to be thankful! Help me still, my dear Mr. _T――――_, to
praise the LORD. I hope to be with you next week. In the mean time
pray for, and if leisure permit, drop a line to, dear Mr. _T――――_,

                           Ever yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXVI.

                 _To Mr. J―――― T――――, in Edinburgh._

                                             _London, Nov. 6, 1742._
  _Dear Mr. T――――_,

ABOUT five this evening, our ever blessed JESUS brought us hither,
and gave us a happy meeting with our dear friends. How good is JESUS
to the chief of sinners! He solaced my soul all the way, and gave his
angels charge concerning us, otherwise we must have been frequently
hurt in our ways: but he heard the prayers of his people. I am
persuaded he gave them a spirit of supplication in our behalf. I felt
it, I feel it now, and long to preach again. My dear friend, remember
us in the dearest manner to all. I hope to write to several on
_Monday_ next. How sweet is rest after fatigue! How sweet will heaven
be, when our journey is ended. Forgive the brevity of this.

                             Ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXVII.

                  _To Mr. J―――― H――――, at Bethesda._

                                            _London, Nov. 12, 1742._
  _My dearest Friend and Brother in a crucified JESUS_,

HOW do I long to come over to see you, and the rest of my dear family?
How do I long to hear how it is with your dear souls, and that you
are returned to _Bethesda_ in safety! The cloud seems now to be
moving toward _America_. I trust I shall be with you in a few months.
Wonderful great things did the LORD perform for me and his people
in _Scotland_. The concern expressed at my departure, was really
unspeakable. O my dear, my very dear brother, the love of GOD to such
an unworthy wretch quite amazes me. I rode post, and came here in
rather less than five days from _Edinburgh_ on _Saturday_ last, and
here seems to be a new awakening. We have been obliged to enlarge the
tabernacle. The LORD’s glory does indeed appear in it. Dear brother
_H――――_ has been sent with a sweet searching commission. Brother
_C――――_ is much blest in _Wiltshire_. The word runs and is glorified
in _Wales_, and GOD is raising some fresh witnesses of the power of
his dear Son’s blood in _Gloucestershire_. Blessed are the eyes that
see the things that we see. GOD doth greatly countenance us indeed. O
free grace! O electing love! The collections in _Scotland_ were large.
At _Edinburgh_, I collected 128 _l._ at one time, and 44 _l._ at
another; at _Glasgow_ about 128 _l._ with private donations. I think
we got about 300 _l._ in all. Blessed be GOD, I owe nothing now in
_England_ on the Orphan-house account; what is due is abroad. I think
since I have been in _England_, we have got near 1500 _l._ The LORD
will raise up what we want further; glory be to his name. He keeps my
faith from failing, and upholds me with his right hand, and makes me
happier in himself every day. My wife lies now very weak. She was
tossed for ten days in her voyage from _Scotland_: The ship was in
imminent danger, but the LORD gave her much of his presence, and I
trust she will be ready shortly for another voyage. She heartily and
most lovingly greets you all, as does in haste,

                        Ever, ever yours, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXVIII.

                       _To Lady Frances G――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 13, 1742._
  _Honoured Madam_,

MINDFUL of my promise, which I made before I left _Edinburgh_, I
now steal a few moments to send your Ladyship a letter of thanks,
and which I trust will find you sitting under the Redeemer’s shadow
with great delight. It rejoiced me when I heard that our infinitely
condescending GOD had blessed my unworthy ministry, to recover your
Ladyship from a state of darkness and spiritual desertion. Glory,
glory be to rich, free and sovereign grace! I trust your Ladyship
will now be kept in the love of GOD, and no idol interpose between the
Redeemer and your soul. I hope the dear Colonel is now in his proper
place, and that you can think of him without anxiety or distracting
care. This is that freedom, wherewith JESUS CHRIST makes us free.
To love all things in him, and for him, and to love him above all.
Thus we have peace and joy. Whenever we deviate from it, we fall into
darkness and distress of soul. I pray GOD your Ladyship may be thus
kept, and enabled to rejoice in GOD all the day long. For ever adored
be free grace. I have enjoyed much freedom of soul since I left
_Edinburgh_. Very good was my master to us on the road, and still
better to me now I am in _London_. We have blessed seasons. O who can
express the loving-kindness of the LORD, or show forth all his praise!
We beg your prayers; and wishing you and your honoured Colonel all
manner of prosperity, I beg leave to subscribe myself, with unfeigned
thanks for all past favours, honoured Madam,

             Your Ladyship’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXIX.

                           _To Miss S――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 13, 1742._

AS I have been writing to the honourable lady _Frances_, I am willing
to inclose a line to you. I trust it will find you walking by faith,
and trampling upon the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the
pride of life. This is the happiness which JESUS CHRIST has purchased
for poor sinners. This is that better part, which I hope you have been
enabled to choose, and in which, I trust, through grace you will be
enabled to persevere even to the end. Dear Miss, if this be the case,
well will it be with you, and happy, exceedingly happy shall you be.
Methinks I hear you say, “I feel my happiness begun.” Keep close, Dear
Miss, keep close to the lovely JESUS, and you will find it increase
day by day. Many, many temptations and difficulties you will meet
with; but fear not; look unto JESUS, and he will make you more than
conqueror through his love. Never rest without looking up to him, in
and for every thing you stand in need of. He will richly supply all
your wants. I speak this by happy experience. Many blessings have I
received since I came hither. O help me to praise our prayer-hearing
GOD.

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXX.

          _To the Honourable Lady Jane H――――, in Edinburgh._

                                            _London, Nov. 13, 1742._
  _Honoured Madam_,

IT is with some regret, that I look back upon my not writing to you,
when I was at _Glasgow_. I resolved ever since, to send your Ladyship
a line as soon as possible, after I reached _London_. Being now
somewhat settled, I attempt in the divine strength to put my design
in execution. And now, honoured Madam, what shall I say? I hope this
will find you a very poor sinner, and sitting at JESU’s feet. With
pleasure I have often thought your Ladyship has been made willing to
become truly, inly poor, and to feel the full power of the Redeemer’s
precious blood. If I mistake not, your soul is athirst for GOD, yea
to be filled with all the fulness of GOD. Go on, dear Madam, for GOD
shall satisfy all your desires: He has promised, and he will perform.
I find my happiness in JESUS increasing daily, and that there is no
end of his goodness. Greatly did he strengthen me on the road; greatly
has he blessed me since I came hither. I believe your Ladyship will
hear shortly from Mr. _H――――_. He is a dear soul indeed, and left
_London_ on _Thursday_ morning last, full of simplicity and love.
The work goes on bravely in _Wales_, and elsewhere. Surely it is the
midnight cry; Surely the bridegroom is coming. Methinks I hear your
Ladyship say, “Then I will make ready to go forth to meet him.” That
you may be always ready to obey the most sudden call, is the hearty
prayer of, honoured Madam,

     Your Ladyship’s most obliged humble servant in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXXI.

                          _To Miss N――――’s._

                                            _London, Nov. 13, 1742._
  _Dear young Ladies_,

THIS week I wrote a few lines to your honoured mamma. I now snatch a
few moments to send a line to you. And why? Because I love you both
in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST, and wish above all things, that your
dear souls may prosper. I saw a happy alteration in you for the better,
whilst I was at _Edinburgh_, and my constant prayer is, that you
might still go on from strength to strength. Here seems to be a new
awakening. We had a glorious fast-day indeed. I trust you had the
same at _Edinburgh_. I am sure we prayed heartily, it might be so. O
_Edinburgh! Edinburgh!_ I think I shall never forget thee. Surely many
can say, “Our fellowship has been with the Father and with the Son.”
And now though absent, we may have fellowship together in and through
the eternal Spirit. Thus it is with me, and thus it is, I believe,
with my dear wife. She most heartily joins with me in saluting your
most honoured mamma, as well as yourselves. Wishing that your lamps
may be always trimmed, and your loins always girded, and that you may
be continually in readiness to meet the heavenly bridegroom; I
subscribe myself, dear young ladies,

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXII.

                              _To ――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 15, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

IT has given me some concern, that I could not write to your Lordship
before I left _E――――_. My departure from thence was very sudden, and
it was but a few days before that I heard of your Lordship’s illness.
However, I have not been unmindful of your Lordship, and I trust, in
answer to prayer, our LORD has rebuked your fever, and that this will
find you risen and ministring unto him. O, my Lord, I think I can say,
“It is good for me that I have been afflicted;” for had it not been so,
I should have gone astray. How apt are we when in health, to follow
JESUS afar off, and sink into tepidity and a laodicean spirit? May
this sickness be sanctified to the purging of your Lordship’s soul,
and be a means of drawing you nearer to GOD! Our glorious High-priest
still continues to load me with his benefits. He dealt most tenderly
with me on the road, and blesses me much here. I am now in my winter
quarters, preparing for a fresh campaign. Happy they that fight under
the Redeemer’s banner! That your Lordship may be always fighting the
good fight of faith, and at length lay hold on eternal life, is the
earnest prayer of, my Lord,

      Your Lordship’s most obedient and obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXIII.

                     _To Mr. S――――, of Bristol._

                                            _London, Nov. 15, 1742._
  _My dear Brother S――――_,

I Gave thanks on your behalf, when I read your letters; being
encouraged thereby to hope, that JESUS CHRIST is indeed about to
take full possession of your soul. A proper season this to enter into
the marriage state, an union representing the mystical union between
JESUS CHRIST and his Church. My brother, you cannot think of it with
too much solemnity. It is a matter of great importance, in which the
future comfort of your life much depends. I would advise you to read
over the matrimonial office, and turn it into a prayer. As for outward
affairs, I think it quite proper to have them settled, as I am a
minister of JESUS CHRIST, and ought therefore to be freed as much
as may be from all worldly incumbrances. Be pleased to draw out your
account, and when the captain comes, desire him to draw out his, that
receipts may pass on both sides. I shall pay Mr. _N――――_ as desired.
I am glad you are so friendly with Mr. _W――――_. I trust we shall learn
more and more to love one another.

              Yours most affectionately in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXIV.

                      _To the Bishop of Bangor._

                                            _London, Nov. 17, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

THE inclosed was sent by a young man, who was coming up to _London_,
and was in his way as far as _Ludlow_, on purpose to wait on your
Lordship about the contents of it. If your Lordship pleases, I will
wait upon your Lordship for your Lordship’s answer. The character
your Lordship has for candour and moderation, makes me believe, your
Lordship will not favour any persecuting proceedings against those
that love the LORD JESUS in sincerity. If your Lordship thinks proper
to speak with me, upon the least intimation, you shall be attended by,
my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXXV.

                  _To Mr. J――――, of Toven in Wales._

                                            _London, Nov. 18, 1742._
  _My dear Brother_,

HOW sweetly does the blessed JESUS guide the meek in his way! I
believe your turning back from _Ludlow_ was of GOD. Dear brother
_H――――_ was about that time going into _Wales_, and the LORD sending
me hither (unworthy as I am) to transact affairs for you. I have seen
your letter to Mr. _L――――_, and likewise that from brother _C――――_,
to the bishop of _Bangor_. I am just now sending it to him, with a
letter from myself, desiring leave to wait upon his Lordship. What
the event will be, our LORD only knows. This, however, we know, “All
things shall work together for good to those that love GOD;” and the
gates of hell shall never prevail against the church of JESUS CHRIST.
What you have met with, is no more than might be expected long ago.
There has been a hook in the Leviathan’s jaws, or otherwise our mouths
had been stopped long before this time. I had once the honour of
being publickly arraigned, for not reading the Common Prayer in
a Meeting-house. At another time, I was taken up by a warrant for
correcting a letter wherein were these words, “Shall our Clergy break
the Canons.” The prosecutions were unjust, but there is our glory.
I remember when _Socrates_ was about to suffer, his friends grieved,
that he suffered unjustly. What, says he, would you have me suffer
justly? If we are buffetted for our faults, and take it patiently,
says a greater than _Socrates_, we are not to glory; “but if we are
reproached for CHRIST, and suffer as Christians, happy are we.” I
think our present sufferings are for him. Surely the spirit of CHRIST
and of glory will rest upon you. However, I trust this storm will
soon blow over. If possible, let an open separation from the church
be avoided. Mr. _H――――_ can tell you more by word of mouth. I trust
the glorious JESUS has sent him amongst you, in the fulness of the
blessing of the gospel of peace. He is a dear soul. I am persuaded you
are dear to him: I find you are dear to me, though I never saw you.
It is enough, that we have drank into one spirit. This creates an
indissoluble union. Pray remember my kind love to dear brother _C――――_.
I wish him joy with all my heart; but would not have him deny that
exhorting is preaching. The Chancellor will be too many for him; for
to be sure, exhorting is at least one part of preaching. Granting this,
he has warrant enough, notwithstanding, from scripture, to tell others
what GOD has done for his soul, and to bid them come and see and
believe in a precious CHRIST. O that word! How sweet is it to my soul?
It is like ointment poured forth. Had I time, I could tell you much of
his love. He has been exceeding good to me in _Scotland_: He is still
so to me here. Vile, base, ungrateful as I am, he lets me lean on his
bosom night and day. My dear brother, help me to praise him, and
engage all the brethren’s prayers in behalf of one, less than the
least of all saints, but

                 Yours most affectionately in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXVI.

               _To the Reverend Dr. C――――, in Boston._

                                            _London, Nov. 18, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

GLAD was I to receive another letter from you, before I sent off my
packets. I thank our loving LORD, for granting me the continuance
of his ministers affections. I hope this, and all his other mercies,
will lead me nearer and nearer to himself the fountain of all
mercies. Surely the friends of JESUS pray in my behalf; for I am still
strengthened more than ever, and enabled to rejoice in his goodness
all the day long. The confusion at _New-England_ has given me concern;
but our LORD will over-rule all for good. I was sorry to hear of
Mr. _D――――_’s imprisonment; and to be imprisoned for an unguarded
expression, I think is too, too severe, and not for the honour of
_Boston_ at all. Had I been in his place, I should have accepted bail.
When I shall come to _Boston_, the LORD JESUS only knows. I believe
it will not be long. I find I shall come in perilous times; but that
all-gracious Saviour, who has helped me hitherto, will guide me by
his council, and give me a true scriptural zeal. This is what I desire
all my friends to beg in my behalf. How hard is it to keep in the
true narrow path, when speaking for the LORD JESUS? GOD preserve me,
and all his ministers, from defending his truths and cause in our own,
or under the influence of a false spirit! It destroys the very cause
we would defend. As yet, in _Scotland_ there have been but few of
the disorders complained of amongst you. But as the work increases, I
suppose the enemies stratagems will increase also. This is my comfort,
JESUS reigns. The gates of hell shall never be able to prevail against
his church. I have had a late instance of his power and goodness,
in driving the _Spaniards_ out of _Georgia_. I hear they are gone.
I hope the Orphans are now at _Bethesda_ in peace. The continuation
of my account, I have sent with this, and a parcel of my sermons. Be
pleased to dispose of them, as you shall think proper. I salute all my
Reverend brethren that preach JESUS CHRIST in sincerity. I wish them
prosperity with all my heart, and pray for them every day, Reverend
Sir, my soul is now filled with a sense of redeeming love. O why me,
LORD, why me? Even so my Saviour, for so it seemed good in thy sight!
But I can write no more, having much business on my hands. We go on
well here. Our LORD blesses us much. I am, with much affection, Rev.
Sir,

                Your most unworthy and younger brother
                    in the gospel of JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXVII.

                        _To Mr. J―――― E――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 18, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

YOUR letter pleased me much. As soon as I read it, I kneeled down,
prayed, and gave thanks on your behalf. How faithful is he that hath
said, “I will never leave thee, or forsake thee.” Surely the LORD
intends to honour you, in making you an instrument in bringing many
sons to glory. I hope he will bless your first public essays to serve
the interest of his great name, and enable you to go on from strength
to strength. I cannot think you will be long without a feeling
possession of your GOD. Shortly, I trust, you will be touched with a
coal from the heavenly altar, and be made to say, “LORD send me.” I
think our Saviour has given you great knowledge in the scriptures. May
you be kept close to and be daily taught of him. My prayer for you is,

                 _Take his poor heart, and let it be
                  For ever clos’d to all but thee._

I think you may study conveniently in _Scotland_; but in this and
every thing else, I pray the LORD JESUS to direct and guide your soul.
I most heartily love you, and wish you prosperity in the name of the
LORD. Our blessed Saviour has been exceeding kind, since I have been
here. I go on my way rejoicing, and am strengthened day by day. That
you may abundantly experience the same, is the hearty prayer of, dear
Sir,

              Yours most affectionately in CHRIST JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCCLXXVIII.

                     _To Mr. M――――, Isle of Man._

                                            _London, Nov. 19, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

I Am concerned to find by your last, dated _November 4th_, that the
letter I sent you from _Scotland_ did not come to hand. But providence
over-ruleth all things; even this shall work for good. I wonder
not, if the LORD has given you more zeal, that you meet with more
opposition. However, I would not have you rash, or over hasty in
leaving the _Isle of Man_. Wait, continue instant in prayer, and you
shall see the salvation of GOD. I have not heard from my family abroad
for some time, and cannot give you any determinate answer about your
going to _Georgia_, because I know not how their affairs stand. GOD
will yet shew you what he would have you to do. Even so LORD JESUS,
Amen and Amen! Our glorious _Emmanuel_ blessed me exceedingly after
we parted from _Scotland_, and blesses me in like manner, now he has
brought me to _England_. Vile, ungrateful as I am, he vouchsafes to
give me much of his presence, and keeps me under the shadow of his
wings. Let his goodness to me, encourage you to hope and trust in him.
Remember, dear Sir, JESUS came to make poor sinners happy, and to give
them victory over their lusts and passions. Plead his promises, be
much in secret prayer, and never give GOD rest, ’till your soul is
filled with all his fulness. That the LORD may hasten that blessed
time, wherein his kingdom shall come with full power into your dear
soul, is the earnest prayer of, Rev. and dear Sir,

         Your most affectionate friend, brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXIX.

                     _To Mr. B――――, at Bethesda._

                                            _London, Nov. 19, 1742._

BLESSED, blessed be GOD, the packet is not gone; so that I have just
time to tell you, I received your kind, very kind letter, though
I have not time to read it thoroughly, least I should miss this
opportunity. GOD only knows how I sympathize with you and my dear
family. Though I have no money to pay Mr. _Jones_, &c. yet, if I
can take up two or three hundred pounds upon my own account, I will
come over, GOD willing, the very first opportunity. The time of your
fasting, I hope is now near over, and the days of your mourning ended.
Remember the burning bush; it was on fire, but not consumed. Surely
some great good is to come out of the Orphan-house. Blessed be GOD,
for strengthening you to stay with my dear family. Ten thousand
blessings descend upon your soul! I wish dear brother _G――――_ joy. I
am much obliged to my dear friend and faithful steward. Next ship, I
hope to answer his letters distinctly. O my dear man, I do not forget
any of you. GOD, and not my own will, has kept me on this side the
water so long. But surely you must judge me sometimes. You need not
make any apology for moving; it is what I wished you might do. Your
care and tenderness towards me, makes me long to embrace and weep over
you one by one. Forget you! no, no; I think I could rather die for
you. My brother, my dear brother, go on. Surely GOD is with us. Great
things are to come out of _Georgia_. Remember _Abraham_, how did
he sojourn in the land of Promise, as in a strange land? The LORD
increase your faith. My tenderest love, and ten thousand thanks, to
dear Mr. _J――――s_. GOD will bless him for helping you. The LORD JESUS
be with you all.

                          Ever, ever yours,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCLXXX.

                      _To the Bishop of Bangor._

                                            _London, Nov. 19, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

THIS evening I received your Lordship’s kind letter. I humbly thank
your Lordship for it. It confirmed me in the character given me of
your Lordship’s spirit. I verily believe your Lordship abhors every
thing that has a tendency to persecution, and yet, in my humble
opinion, if Mr. _C――――_ is not somewhat redressed, he is persecuted
indeed. That your Lordship may know his spirit, and the spirit of
the person who came as far as _Ludlow_ on the business, I have sent
your Lordship a letter from each, which was written some time ago to
Mr. _H―――― H――――_. In them your Lordship will see their whole hearts.
I verily believe they would rather die than wilfully speak or write
a falshood. My Lord, the whole of the matter seems to be this: In
_Wales_ they have little fellowship meetings, where some well-meaning
people meet together, simply to tell what GOD has done for their souls.
In some of these meetings, I believe Mr. _C――――_ used to tell his
experience, and to invite his companions to come and be happy in
JESUS CHRIST. He is therefore indicted as holding a conventicle; and
this I find is the case of one, if not two more. Now, my Lord, these
persons thus indicted, as far as I can judge, are loyal subjects to
his Majesty, and true friends to, and attendants upon the Church of
_England_ service. You will see by these letters, how unwilling they
are to leave her; and yet, if all those acts, which were made against
persons meeting together to plot against Church and State, were put
in execution against them, what must they do? They must be obliged
to declare themselves Dissenters. I assure your Lordship, it is a
critical time in _Wales_. Hundreds, if not thousands, will go in a
body from the Church, if such proceedings are countenanced. I lately
wrote them a letter, dissuading them from separating from the Church,
and I write thus freely to your Lordship, because of the excellent
spirit of moderation discernible in your Lordship, and because I would
not have (to use your Lordship’s own expression) “such a fire kindled
in, or from your (Lordship’s) diocese.” I would beg the favour of your
Lordship to return me the inclosed, because I have not kept copies.
I send them to your Lordship just as they are, that your Lordship
may see the whole affair, and censure what is exceptionable. I really
believe the writers will thank your Lordship for it. I ask pardon for
taking up so much of your Lordship’s time, but I thought your Lordship
would desire to have all possible information, that you might be
better capable of judging. I pray the great Shepherd and Bishop of
souls to direct your Lordship in this, and every other affair that
comes before you, and that you may be saluted at the great day with
an _Euge bone_, is the hearty and fervent prayer of, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXI.

                           _To Mr. C――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 20, 1742._
  _My dear Brother C――――_,

I Catch a few moments to give you an account of my agency. Your letter
I sent to the Bishop of _Bangor_, inclosed in one from myself. His
answer you have transcribed in this. That he might not be imposed
upon by the Chancellor’s representing of things, I last night sent
his Lordship another long letter, with that which you wrote to dear
brother _H――――_ some time ago. As the Bishop seems to be a man of
a moderate spirit, I trust this storm will blow over. In the mean
while, let us wait upon the LORD, commit the cause into his hands who
judgeth righteously, and pray, that we may be “as wise as serpents,
and harmless as doves.” Glad shall I be to serve you, my dear brother,
in this, or any other affair, for advancing our glorious Mediator’s
kingdom. Let this be our comfort, the gates of hell shall never be
able to prevail against it. Let us go on then, and never fear what men
or devils can say of, or do unto us. I suppose this is the language of
your heart,

               _The love of CHRIST doth me constrain
                To seek the wand’ring souls of men:
                All hail reproach, and welcome pain,
                Only thy terrors, LORD, restrain._

And if so, surely the spirit of CHRIST and of glory will rest upon
you. Our dear brother _C――――_ is sadly used in _Wiltshire_. The
compassionate Redeemer of souls pities my weakness, and suffers very
little disturbance to be made. We have sweet times, and, vile as I am,
JESUS is pleased to keep me near him. I hope this will find your dear
soul sitting under his shadow with great delight. I know you not in
the flesh, but hope to see you before I embark. Letters call me loudly
to _Georgia_. My dear family are returned to their _Bethesda_ in
safety. O help me, my dear brother, to praise the LORD. Salute all the
brethren in behalf of

                    Yours most affectionately, &c.

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXII.

        _To Mr. V――――, Secretary to the Trustees of Georgia._

                                            _London, Nov. 20, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

GOD willing, I intend waiting upon the honourable Trustees at the time
appointed. Yesterday I received a packet of letters from my friends
at the Orphan-house. I find they are returned in safety to _Bethesda_,
and give a noble account of the General’s conduct. Blessed be GOD, for
enabling him to repel the enemy; but now another distress is come upon
poor _Georgia_. A violent sickness rages and has taken off many. My
letters say, the Orphan-house surgeon had 50 under his hands. This,
I trust, will more and more convince the Honourable Trustees, of the
benefit the Orphan-house is and will be to the Colony. I hear, that Mr.
_O――――_, the minister of _Savannah_, is dead. I know one Mr. _M――――_,
a clergyman in the _Isle of Man_, who would go over and supply his
place, if he was applied to. The Bishop of _Sodor and Man_ I believe
will give him a recommendation. You may acquaint the Honourable
Trustees with this, and let me know their answer. I hope in about two
months to embark for _Georgia_. I find GOD has given my family a good
crop; but the hands are sick, so they cannot speedily carry it in.
What condition the Orphan-house was in lately, the inclosed will shew.
Be pleased to let the Honourable Trustees have a sight of it, and
believe me to be, dear Sir,

                   Your obliged friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCCLXXXIII.

                           _To Mr. C――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 20, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

THE first part of your letter did not surprize me at all, though it
made me look up to the LORD for you. I believed you would be down in
the valley of humiliation soon; but fear not, it is only that you may
be exalted the more. I trust, this will find you mounting on wings
like an eagle, walking, yet not weary; running, yet not faint. GOD
has, does, and will remarkably appear for you. Doubtless, you are his
servant and minister. He therefore that touches you, touches the apple
of GOD’s eye. Poor _Wiltshire_ people! I pity them. If I knew their
Bishop, I would apply to him on their behalf. I wrote to the Bishop
of _Bangor_ for our brethren in _Wales_, and have received a very
favourable answer. The wrath of man shall turn to GOD’s praise, and
the remainder of it he will restrain. How wonderfully has he appeared
in all ages for his church and people! My dear family abroad has
been marvellously preserved. Blessed be GOD, they are returned to
_Bethesda_ in peace. We have sweet seasons daily, and I am carried
in the arms of love. My Master careth for me, and seems to order my
goings in his way. O help me to praise him. I think you are never
forgotten by, my dear _C――――_,

             Your most affectionate brother and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXIV.

                        _To Mr. J―――― E――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 23, 1742._
  _Dear Sir_,

HOW gently does the LORD deal with his followers? “As a father pitieth
his own children, so is the LORD merciful to them that fear him.” Now
your father is a little uneasy, your grandfather is more favourable.
The LORD will never suffer you to be tempted above what you will be
enabled to bear. He will make a way for you to escape. I am glad you
have determined to study at _E――――_. Two things, I would earnestly
recommend to your constant study, the _book of_ GOD, and _your own
heart_. These two, well understood, will make you an able minister of
the New Testament. In what manner you shall be hereafter employed, I
would have you be indifferent about. “Take no thought for the morrow.”
Let the LORD send you, when and where he will send you. In the mean
while, do as much for GOD in a private way as you can. “Exercise
thyself unto godliness,” and walk so humbly, that all may know our
LORD has chosen you to be a gospel prophet. I rejoice, that the work
is still going on. Blessed be GOD, we have good times here. I am kept
in great liberty. Be pleased to desire all to accept of hearty love
from, dear Sir,

              Your most affectionate friend and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXV.

                        _To the Earl of ――――._

                                            _London, Nov. 23, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

SINCE I wrote to your Lordship, I have received a comfortable packet
of letters from _Georgia_, giving me an account of my family’s safe
return to their _Bethesda_. The deliverance of _Georgia_ from the
_Spaniards_, one of my friends writes me, is such as cannot be
parralleled, but by some few instances out of the Old Testament.
I find that the _Spaniards_ had cast lots, and determined to give
no quarter. They intended to attack _Carolina_, but wanting water
they put into _Georgia_, and so would take that Colony in their way.
But “the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.”
Providence ruleth all things. They were wonderfully repelled and sent
away, before our ships were seen. Surely GOD remembered the prayers
of the poor orphans, and the earnest cries which have been put up on
their behalf. I find they now live at a smaller expence. They hunt
and shoot for a good part of their food. Their crop gives them a
considerable quantity of peas, potatoes, &c. and they kill some of
their own stock. There has been a great sickness at _Savannah_. Some
of the labourers have been taken off, but none of the children, as I
hear, have died as yet. I hope this will find your Lordship perfectly
recovered, and your honoured consort, Lady ――――, and all your
Lordship’s family, rejoicing in GOD. He is pleased to give me much of
his love, and to bless me every day. Several of our friends in _Wales_
have been unjustly excommunicated. I have sent two letters, and have
received kind answers from the Bishop of _Bangor_. Perilous times,
perhaps, are coming on; but this is my comfort, “the gates of hell
shall never prevail against the church of CHRIST.” Hoping for a line
from your Lordship, if it be not too much trouble, I subscribe myself,
my Lord,

        Your Lordship’s most obedient, obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXVI.

                           _To Miss W――――._

                                        _London, November 23, 1742._
  _My dear Miss W――――_,

YOUR letter affected me much, and if it had not been for business, I
should have answered it ere now. It is the hardest thing in the world
to keep the creature in his proper place. We are apt to esteem the
ministers of JESUS either too much or too little. One while, we could
pluck out our eyes to give them; at another time, run into a contrary
extreme, and not pay them that respect which is their due for their
Master’s sake. The love that a child of GOD feels for its spiritual
father, is certainly unspeakable. O how can I but love him, who under
GOD has brought me from darkness into light! Methinks I hear dear Miss
_W――――_ say, “how indeed!” But here is danger, lest the affections
should be too much entangled, and we unwilling to give up the beloved
object to our GOD. This, I suppose, is dear Miss _W――――_’s case, and I
can say,

                   _I know how sore this trial is,
                    For I have felt the same._

O what have I suffered in parting from spiritual friends, especially
such as were my _Isaac_’s! But CHRIST’s grace has been sufficient for
me, and so it will be for you. I have prayed for you, and hope by this
time dear Miss _W――――_ can say, my spiritual Father keeps his proper
place, and I walk in liberty and the love of GOD. Indeed, my dear Miss,
no one but the searcher of hearts knows, what a real concern I have
for your eternal welfare. I verily believe I shall see you sitting at
the right hand of your Redeemer. Surely he has captivated and stolen
your heart away. I hope nothing will divert you from him; but with
a single eye to his glory, you will go through good report and evil
report, ’till you come to the blessed place, where the wicked will
cease from troubling, and your weary soul enjoy an everlasting rest.
Glad shall I be to hear from you every opportunity. Ere long I must
away. Pray our Saviour to help me under all my difficulties, but
at the same time help me to praise him: for amidst all my various
circumstances, I am kept joying in GOD, and made more than conqueror
through his love. We have had blessed times since my arrival here.

         Your most affectionate friend and servant in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCCLXXXVII.

                      _To the Bishop of Bangor._

                                            _London, Nov. 23, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

I Humbly thank your Lordship for your Lordship’s second kind letter.
Your Lordship shall have Mr. _C――――_’s letter whenever your Lordship
pleases to demand it. I sent it for no other purpose, than to let your
Lordship into the affair as far as lay in my power. I am quite willing
your Lordship should hear both sides. I doubt not but your Lordship
will do justice. The candour and moderation which breathe in your
Lordship’s letters, and your condescension in writing to me, incline
me to take the freedom of begging your Lordship’s acceptance of my
last volume of sermons, and the Orphan-house accounts, from, my Lord,

       Your Lordship’s most obliged, obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                         LETTER CCCCLXXXVIII.

                  _To Professor Frank, in Germany._

                                            _London, Nov. 24, 1742._
  _Rev. Sir_,

LONG have I designed writing to you, but something or another has
always prevented me. However, I can now defer it no longer. For though
I never saw you in the flesh, yet I love and highly esteem you in the
bowels of JESUS CHRIST, and wish you much prosperity in the work of
the LORD. Your honoured father’s memory is very precious to me. His
account of the Orphan-house hath, under GOD, been a great support
and encouragement to me in a like undertaking. How it prospers, the
account sent with this will inform you. Only it will be proper to
observe, that since the publication of the last, there have been
upwards of 300 _l._ collected. I am yet about 400 _l._ in arrears. But
I know in whom I have believed, for the carrying on of that building.
Hitherto it has answered its motto, and has been like the burning
bush on fire, but not consumed. The Colony’s late deliverance from
the _Spaniards_ was very extraordinary. I cannot but think the LORD
intends yet to do great things for _Georgia_. How is it with the
_Saltzburghers_? I have not heard. Sometime ago I sent them over
twenty pounds, and wish it was in my power to send them more. About
_January_, GOD willing, I intend to embark. In the mean while, I
should be glad to know, Rev. Sir, how it is with your Orphan-house?
and whether you have any commands to _Georgia_? I suppose you have
heard of the work of GOD in _Scotland_. Indeed the word has run and
been glorified, and JESUS has gotten himself the victory in many
hearts. In _England_ also he is pleased to bless us. Here are many
close followers of the blessed Lamb of GOD, and though there is a
difference of opinion between me and Mr. _W――――_, yet JESUS pities us
and blesses us all. I long for that time, “when the watchmen shall all
see eye to eye; when the leopard shall lie down with the kid, the lion
eat straw like the ox, and the people of GOD learn war and jangle no
more.” Hasten that time, O glorious _Emmanuel_, and let thy kingdom
come!――Rev. Sir, whilst I am writing, the fire of love kindles in
my heart. I am amazed, to think the blessed JESUS should employ such
an unworthy wretch as I am: But thy grace is free, for, O my GOD, it
found me out. The love you bear to the lovely JESUS, I am persuaded
will excite you to pray for me. Glad should I be of a line from you,
and the Rev. Mr. _Ulspurgher_; but I deserve no regard for not writing
to you both. But you know how to forgive, for GOD for CHRIST’s sake
hath forgiven you. Hoping therefore for a line from you by the hands
of the Rev. Mr. _Z――――_, I subscribe myself, Reverend and dear Sir,

    Your most obliged, affectionate, tho’ unworthy younger brother
    and servant in the kingdom and patience of the blessed JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCLXXXIX.

                     _To Mr. P――――, of Newbury._

                                            _London, Nov. 27, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

THIS morning I received your sweet and lovely letter. It humbled me
before GOD; but I rejoiced, as I had long since publickly recanted
all that is exceptionable in that extract. I think I was overseen
in publishing it; but this is not the first blunder I have made. My
mistakes have been so many, and my imprudence so great, that I have
often wondered that the glorious JESUS would employ me in his service.
But he has proved his eternal goodness, long-suffering, and love, by
bearing with me, and, Rev. and dear Sir, he still delights to honour
me. Since I have been in _London_, he has given me great freedom
of soul, and caused his word to come with power. I have news of my
family being safe at _Georgia_. GOD willing, I purpose to embark next
_January_. I most heartily thank you for this last instance of your
love, and pray our dear JESUS to reward you for it. Your seeing what
a poor, weak, fallible creature I am, I trust will stir you up to be
more earnest for me at the throne of grace. Next week I intend sending
you a parcel, wherein you will have more particular accounts of the
work in _Scotland_. I hear the gospel flourishes in _Gloucestershire_
and _Wales_. Dear Mr. _C――――_ will be sadly missed. But he is in peace,
and the residue of the spirit is in the Redeemer’s hands. That you and
your dear flock and family may experience a large effusion of it in
your dear souls, is and shall be the earnest prayer of, dear and Rev.
Sir,

          Your most affectionate, tho’ most unworthy brother
                     and servant in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                            LETTER CCCCXC.

                      _To the Bishop of Sarum._

                                                    _Nov. 30, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

I Beg your Lordship’s pardon for troubling you with this. I believe
your Lordship will not be offended, when you know the cause. There
is one Mr. _C――――_, a true lover of JESUS CHRIST, who has been much
honoured in bringing many poor sinners in _Wiltshire_ to the knowledge
of themselves and of GOD. He is a member of the Church of _England_,
but sadly opposed by the clergy in _Wiltshire_, as well as by many
that will come to hear him preach. In a letter, dated _November 16th_,
from _Toxham_, he writes thus: “The enemy seems to be more awakened in
the villages round about us, than before. The ministers of _Bramble_,
_Segery_, _Langley_, and many others, have strictly forbidden the
church-wardens and overseers to let any of the _C――――_’s have any
thing out of the parish; and they obey them, and tell the poor,
if they cannot stop them from following any other way, they will
famish them. Several of the poor, who have great families (to my own
knowledge) have already been denied any help, for this reason, because
they follow this way. Some of the people have, out of fear, denied
they ever came, and others have been made to promise they will come
no more; whilst the most part come at the loss of friends and all
they have. When the officers threatned some to take away their pay;
they answered, if you starve us, we will go, and rather than we will
forbear, we will live upon grass like the kine. Surely the cries of
the distressed people have already entered into the ears of the LORD
of _Sabaoth_.” In another letter I received from him last night, he
writes thus: “I should be glad if you could mention the cruelty of the
ministers of _Bramble_, and _Segery_, to the Bishop of _Sarum_; indeed,
their doings are inhuman. The cry of the people, because of their
oppression, is very great; several suffer amazingly.”――In compliance
with my dear friend’s request, I presume to lay the matter, as
he represents it, before your Lordship, being persuaded that your
Lordship will not favour persecuting practices, or approve of such
proceedings to keep people to the Church of _England_. Should this
young man leave the Church, hundreds would leave it with him. But I
know that at present he has no such design. If your Lordship pleases
to give me leave, I would wait upon your Lordship upon the least
notice. Or if your Lordship is pleased to send a line into _Wiltshire_,
to know the truth of the matter, and judge accordingly, it will
satisfy, my Lord,

            Your Lordship’s most obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXCI.

                           _To Mr. J――――._

                                             _London, Dec. 4, 1742._

IF my dear brother _J――――_ took it kind, that I called at his house,
I am sure I took it much kinder that he was pleased to send unworthy
me so kind a letter. It has so affected me, that I have been praying
before my Saviour for you; and though nature calls for rest, I
cannot obey it, before I have written to my dear Mr. _J――――_. Vile,
unfaithful as I am, my Master lets me have my hands full of work. From
morning ’till midnight I am employed, and, glory be to rich grace,
I am carried through the duties of each day with chearfulness, and
almost uninterrupted tranquility. Our society is large, but in good
order, and we make improvements daily. My Master gives us much of his
gracious presence, both in our public and private administrations.
In our love-feasts, JESUS comes and says, “Peace be unto you.” In
our great congregation, he gives poor sinners to look, and mourn, and
live. In _Scotland_ the work was very extraordinary. In _Wales_ the
word runs and is glorified much. In _Gloucestershire_, _Wiltshire_,
and _Bristol_, our LORD gets himself the victory in many hearts. In
_Newcastle_, our brother _W――――_’s are blessed much, and I heartily
rejoice to hear that our dear Saviour is so much among you. If I know
any thing of this my desperately wicked heart, I am dead to parties,
and freed from the pain, which on that account once disturbed the
peace of my soul. Indeed, JESUS has taken many things from me, and
made me to experience, that in him there is plenteous redemption.
About _January_, I purpose, GOD willing, to embark for _Georgia_. My
dear family hath been wonderfully preserved. As the Orphan-house was
built by faith, I trust the gates of hell shall never prevail against
it. Methinks I hear my dear Mr. _J――――_ say, Amen. I most cordially
salute your dear Lady, dear brother _S――――_, and all the brethren.
I saw our dear _S――――_ before he went. I intended having some sweet
fellowship with the church in _Yorkshire_, but was prevented by riding
post. If dear brother _H――――_, or _D――――_, or any of the brethren,
have any thing to say to a poor sinner, I should be glad to hear from
them. Let this provoke you, my dear brother, to send me another letter.
I’ll redeem time from sleep, rather than it should not be answered by,
my dear Mr. _J――――_,

           Your most affectionate, though unworthy, sinful
                 and younger brother in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXCII.

                     _To the Bishop of Bristol._

                                             _London, Dec. 5, 1742._
  _My Lord_,

AS your Lordship was pleased to contribute towards the Orphan-house
in _Georgia_, I think your Lordship has a right to hear how that
undertaking succeeds. I have made bold to send your Lordship the
accounts of it, which are published. Since the last was printed, I
have collected about 300 _l._ and have heard that my family are all
safe at the Orphan-house. I have also taken the freedom of sending
your Lordship my last volume of sermons; in accepting of which, your
Lordship will much oblige

            Your Lordship’s most obedient son and servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXCIII.

                    _To Mr. S――――, at Worcester._

                                             _London, Dec. 9, 1742._
  _Rev. and dear Sir_,

HOWEVER engaged I may be, I think it my duty to answer your kind
letter as soon as possible. It is not fit that my Master’s aged
servant should wait long for an answer from a younger brother,
especially as I know you write with so much difficulty. I thank you,
Rev. Sir, for your plain dealing. It is what pleaseth me well. Indeed,
I feel myself a poor, vile, worthless creature, and am glad to receive
advice from you, who have been so long in the Redeemer’s service.
However ungrateful it may be to the old man, the language of my heart
is, “LORD, search me and try me, and whatever secret wickedness lurks
in my soul, discover it to me, and give me power over it, that nothing
may divert me from that way, which leads me to life everlasting.”
Your advice, Rev. Sir, in respect to preaching, was salutary and good,
and if I may speak any thing of myself, is what I keep close to. I
am remarked for my evangelical preaching, and comforting the mourners
of _Zion_. I am never so much in my element, as when I preach free
grace to the chief of sinners. As to the gentleman you mention, I do
not remember I ever conversed with such a person. I believe there can
scarce an instance be given of any one sent to _Bedlam_ by my sermons.
But I rejoice in this, and all other calumnies that are cast upon me.

                 _All hail reproach, welcome pain,
                  Only thy terrors, LORD, restrain._

I must have some thorn in the flesh, to serve as a poise to the
great honour my Master is pleased to put upon me. In _Scotland_, my
reception was extraordinary. It was almost wholly amongst the people
and clergy of the _kirk_, with many of the highest rank. I was very
intimate with several persons of quality, who I trust have been
awakened to a true sense of the divine life, and enabled to count
all things but dung and dross for the excellency of the knowledge
of CHRIST JESUS their LORD. My chief opposition was from the dear
Mr. _E――――s_ and the associate presbytery. They first invited me
to _Scotland_; but finding I would preach for the ministers of the
established church, as well as for them, they spoke all manner of
evil against me falsly, and imputed all the work in _Scotland_ and
_New-England_ to the agency of the evil spirit. I pitied, prayed for,
and loved them, and do so still. O, reverend Sir, what thanks shall I
give to my LORD for carrying me through so many trying dispensations?
I know you will help me to adore and praise him. I am much blessed
here. We have many gracious souls. Ere long I must leave them. I have
not the least thought of seeing _Worcester_. Glad shall I be to kiss
your aged hands; but I shall see you in glory. Begging the continuance
of your prayers, and with all possible thanks for all favours, I
subscribe myself, reverend and dear Sir,

    Your most obliged and affectionate friend and younger brother
                        and servant in JESUS,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXCIV.

                    _To Mr. D――――, of Edinburgh._

                                            _London, Dec. 18, 1742._
  _My very dear Friend and Brother_,

LAST night, just before your kind letter came to hand, I had been
lying on my face before our compassionate High-Priest, telling him
what great expences lay before me for his great Name sake. I wanted
300 _l._ to pay for the Orphans, and much to pay for my own necessary
expences, which he, by his providence, brought upon me. Your letter
came as an answer to my prayer. It humbled, at the same time that it
elated my soul, and greatly strengthened my faith. Surely the LORD is
on my side, and the Orphan-house will stand unconsumed in fire. The
enemies, and even many friends of JESUS speak against it; but this is
all to bring me nearer to the blessed JESUS, and to convince me that
our extremity is GOD’s opportunity. My dear man, GOD will abundantly
bless you for helping me at this juncture. I can find but few, who
think it a favour to do any thing for GOD, and love to help a friend
to the very last. O, dear Sir, was you here, I could weep over you,
and thank you most heartily. Last night I was enabled to intercede
for you very much. GOD will hear my prayer, and not let my dear friend
lose his reward. The 16th of this month was my birth-day. It made me
blush to think how much sin I have committed against, and how little
good I have done for GOD. As soon as I opened and read your letter,
amazed, I cried out, I am the vilest wretch living, and so I think now.
I know you will pray for me, and thank our Saviour too. He is very
kind to me. Our society goes on well. I am now in my winter-quarters,
preparing for a fresh campaign. Though I richly deserve it, yet our
infinitely condescending JESUS will not lay me aside, until he has
performed all his good pleasure in and by me. Wishing you, my dear
Sir, all the blessings of the everlasting covenant, and sending you
ten thousand thanks for all favours, I subscribe myself,

           Your most obliged affectionate friend, brother,
                and unworthy servant in JESUS CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXCV.

                           _To Mr. I――――._

                                            _London, Dec. 21, 1742._
  _My very dear Brother_,

WHEN your letters come, I find great freedom to send immediate answers.
A proof this, I trust, that our Saviour intends our brotherly love not
only to continue, but increase. This day I dined with old Mr. _F――――_,
and was kindly entertained by him and his wife. I then remembered what
sweet counsel we had there taken together, and rejoiced in the happy
prospect of our being ere long for ever together with our blessed and
glorious LORD. My brother, what has our Saviour done for us since that
time? What is he doing for us now? what did he do ere time began? what
will he do when time shall be no more? O how sweet is it to be melted
down with a sense of redeeming love! It is this must strike the rock,
and break the bars of unbelief asunder. O! to be kept always low
at the feet of JESUS! It is right, my brother, always to insist on
poverty of spirit, and emptying the creature of self. I heartily join
with you in your petition for yourself and unworthy me. I know what a
dreadful thing it is, to carry much sail without proper ballast, and
to rejoice in a false liberty. Joy floating upon the surface of an
unmortified heart, is but of short continuance. It puffs up, but doth
not edify. I thank our Saviour that he is shewing us here more of our
hearts, and more of his love. I doubt not but he deals so with you. I
heartily greet your dear houshold, and your societies, and return my
love to Mr. _S――――_. I have heard him mentioned by lady _F―――― G――――_.
If our Saviour gives me leave, I would gladly come to _Yorkshire_.
But I think the cloud points strongly towards _Georgia_. He hath taken
wonderful care of the sheep left in yonder wilderness, and interposed
mightily in their behalf. I know you will thank him for it. I have had
a loving conference with dear Mr. _B――――_, and have received a sweet
gospel-letter from dear Mr. _H――――_. With this I send to him, you, and
yours, and all the brethren, most hearty love, and am, my very dear
brother,

                        Ever yours in CHRIST,

                                                             _G. W._


                           LETTER CCCCXCVI.

                  _To the Honourable Colonel G――――._

                                            _London, Dec. 21, 1742._
  _Honoured Sir_,

YOUR kind letter put me in mind of righteous _Lot_, whose soul was
grieved day by day at the ungodly conversation of the wicked. It
was the same with holy _David_. His eyes, like yours, honoured Sir,
gushed out with water because men kept not GOD’s law. Let this be
your comfort, honoured Sir, that ere long “the wicked shall cease from
troubling you, and your weary soul shall be at rest.” Our Saviour will
give you a discharge, when you have fought a few more battles for him.
An exceeding and eternal weight of glory is laid up for you, which
GOD the righteous judge shall give you at that day. I confess your
situation and employment cannot be very agreeable to a disciple of
the prince of peace. But persons can better judge for themselves, than
strangers can judge for them. However, I cannot say, I would change
posts. Indeed, honoured Sir, I think mine is a glorious employ. I am
not ashamed of my master, though my master may well be ashamed of me.
I know no other reason, why JESUS has put me into the ministry,
than because I am the chief of sinners, and therefore fittest to
preach free grace to a world lying in the wicked one. Blessed be
GOD, he gives much success, and for the generality answers your
prayers, by giving me a thriving soul in a healthful body. But O my
unfruitfulness! I am often ashamed that I can do no more for that
JESUS who hath redeemed me by his own most precious blood. Honoured
Sir, the thoughts quite confound me. O that I could lie lower! then
should I rise higher. Could I take deeper root downwards, then should
I bear more fruit upwards. I want to be poor in spirit. I want to be
meek and lowly in heart. I want to have the whole mind that was in
CHRIST JESUS. Blessed be his name for what he has given me already.
Blessed be his name, that out of his fulness I receive grace for grace.
O that my heart was CHRIST’s library! I would not have one thief to
lodge in my Redeemer’s temple. “LORD, scourge out every thief,” is
the daily language of my heart. The LORD will hear my prayer, and let
my cry come unto him. I have just been writing to your honoured lady.
I think she grows in grace. May you and yours be filled with all the
fulness of GOD! In about six weeks, GOD willing, I purpose to embark
for _Georgia_. Our LORD has wonderfully appeared for my poor orphans.
I am yet in arrears for them, but my GOD knows how to supply all my
wants. I am enabled to cast all my care upon him, believing that he
careth for me. I hope to have the favour of another letter before I
embark. In the mean while, I beg the continuance of your prayers, and
am, honoured Sir,

        Your most affectionate, though very unworthy brother,
                  and servant in our glorious head,

                                                             _G. W._


                          LETTER CCCCXCVII.

                     _To Lady Jane H―――― C――――._

                                            _London, Dec. 23, 1742._
  _Honoured Madam_,

HOW are we obliged to your Ladyship? Had I time I would endeavour to
tell you; but this is my comfort, when I have not time to write, I
have a heart given me to pray for my dear friends, and you, Honoured
Madam, have a constant share in my poor petitions. I find by yours to
my wife, that you complain of darkness. Ere now, I hope the day-star
hath again risen in your heart, and you have been made to rejoice
with exceeding great joy. Our LORD will not leave you comfortless; he
will send the Holy Ghost to comfort you. The time of singing of birds
shall come. Our LORD will not be always chiding.――This is only to
shew you more of your heart, and make you what you long to be, a very
poor sinner. Our hearts, Honoured Madam, are so desperately wicked,
deceitful above all things, that without repeated instances of feeling
our helplessness and misery, we should forget ourselves, and run away
from the feet of our LORD and Saviour. He therefore, in love, empties
before he fills; humbles before he exalts. At least, he is pleased to
deal thus with me. I thank him for it, from my inmost soul: for was
it not so, his mercies would destroy us. He helps me also to praise
him. When I discover a new corruption, I am as thankful as a centinel
keeping watch in a garrison, would be at spying a straggling enemy
come near him. I stand not fighting with it myself in my own strength,
but run immediately and tell the captain of my salvation. By the sword
of his spirit, he soon destroys it, and makes me exceeding happy.
This is what I call a simple looking to CHRIST. I know of no other
effectual way of keeping the old man down, after he has gotten his
deadly blow. Look up then, dear Madam, to a wounded Saviour. Go to
him as a little child. Tell him your whole heart. He will hear your
lisping, and set your soul at liberty. He is pleased graciously to
answer my petitions, and to bless my poor labours. We have many good
souls in our society, that are gently coming into the knowledge of
themselves. Our Saviour deals most lovingly with us indeed. Last night
we had a general love-feast. It was exceeding awful and refreshing.
I could have wished for some of my dear _Scotland_ friends. I was
enabled to pray for them most fervently. May JESUS bless this letter
to your soul! Wishing, above all things, that it may be in health and
prosper, and with humble acknowledgments for all favours, I subscribe
myself, Honoured Madam,

             Your Ladyship’s most obliged humble servant,

                                                             _G. W._


                     The END of the FIRST VOLUME.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND
GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M.A, VOL. 1 (OF 6) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
